Title: Evolving the Complete Muscle: Efficient Morphology-Control Co-design for Musculoskeletal Locomotion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12855v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:35:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Evolving the Complete Muscle: Efficient Morphology-Control Co-design for Musculoskeletal Locomotion 

Lidong Sun 1, Wentao Zhao 2, Ye Wang 3, Huaping Liu 2, and Fuchun Sun 2

Abstract — Musculoskeletal robots offer intrinsic compliance and flexibility, providing a promising paradigm for versatile lo-comotion. However, existing research typically relies on models with fixed muscle physiological parameters. This static physical setting fails to accommodate the diverse dynamic demands of complex tasks, inherently limiting the robot’s performance upper bound. In this work, we focus on the morphology and control co-design of musculoskeletal systems. Unlike previous studies that optimize single physiological attributes such as stiff-ness, we introduce a Complete Musculoskeletal Morphological Evolution Space that simultaneously evolves muscle strength, velocity, and stiffness. To overcome the exponential expansion of the exploration space caused by this comprehensive evolution, we propose Spectral Design Evolution (SDE), a high-efficiency co-optimization framework. By integrating a bilateral sym-metry prior with Principal Component Analysis (PCA), SDE projects complex muscle parameters onto a low-dimensional spectral manifold, enabling efficient morphological exploration. Evaluated on the MyoSuite framework across four tasks (Walk, Stair, Hilly, and Rough terrains), our method demonstrates superior learning efficiency and locomotion stability compared to fixed-morphology and standard evolutionary baselines. 

I. INTRODUCTION Musculoskeletal robots, inspired by the intricate biome-chanical structures of biological organisms, offer a promising paradigm to achieve biological-level agility and versatility in robotic locomotion. Unlike traditional robots driven by joint motors, these bio-inspired systems leverage muscle-tendon units (MTUs) which exhibit complex non-linear dynamics and intrinsic compliance [1], [2]. In these systems, muscles serve as the primary drivers of movement, providing the essential flexibility and bio-fidelity required for interaction with the complex physical world [3]. However, most existing research on musculoskeletal con-trol typically employs models with fixed muscle physio-logical parameters. Such static physical settings inherently limit the upper bound of learning algorithms, as a fixed morphology restricts the robot’s capacity to handle tasks with varying dynamic demands. In nature, biological organisms exhibit remarkable adaptability by evolving their physical structures alongside their nervous systems to better suit their environments [4], [5]. Drawing inspiration from this biological phenomenon, it is imperative to move beyond  

> Corresponding author: Fuchun Sun.
> 1Lidong Sun is with Naval University of Engineering, Wuhan 430033, China

13942645995@163.com          

> 2Wentao Zhao, Huaping Liu, Fuchun Sun are with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

zhaowt25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn, fcsun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn  

> 3Ye Wang is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

Alexye.wang22@gmail.com 

Fig. 1: Conceptual overview of Spectral Design Evolution (SDE). (Left) Fixed-morphology agent fails on challenging terrains due to physical limits. (Right) SDE optimizes mus-cle triad parameters ( σ, ν, κ ) on a low-dimensional spectral manifold, enabling the robot to adapt its physical capacity for superior locomotion stability. pure control optimization and pursue the co-optimization of muscle morphological parameters and control policies. A recent study [6] has explored muscle development by optimizing stiffness parameters to enhance task performance. While effective for specific scenarios like grasping, we observe that optimizing a single dimension such as stiffness is insufficient for highly dynamic tasks like locomotion, which primarily rely on active force generation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, if the system optimizes only passive stiffness without sufficient active strength, the robot may struggle to learn adaptive force-generation patterns required to traverse rough terrains or climb stairs. To address this, we propose a more comprehensive musculoskeletal morphological evo-lution space that simultaneously optimizes muscle strength ,

velocity , and stiffness .While this multi-dimensional expansion provides the nec-essary physical foundation for complex behaviors, it in-evitably introduces a severe “curse of dimensionality”. This vast and functionally interdependent parameter space poses immense exploration challenges, causing standard reinforce-ment learning and co-optimization methods to suffer from low sample efficiency and a high susceptibility to suboptimal local minima. To mitigate this, we propose the Spectral Design Evolution (SDE) paradigm (see Fig. 2). By coupling bilateral symmetry priors with principal component map-ping, SDE reformulates the high-dimensional muscle design problem into a low-dimensional spectral manifold search, enabling the synchronous evolution of complex biological morphology and control policies. The main contributions of this work are summarized as 

> arXiv:2604.12855v1 [cs.RO] 14 Apr 2026

follows:  

> •

Complete Musculoskeletal Morphological Evolution Space: We construct a comprehensive evolution space for musculoskeletal systems by incorporating a triad of critical physiological properties: strength, velocity, and stiffness, allowing the agent to transcend fixed physical limits and adapt to more diverse task scenarios.  

> •

Spectral Design Evolution (SDE) Algorithm: We propose a novel co-design algorithm that reformulates the high-dimensional muscle design problem into a low-dimensional spectral manifold search. By coupling bilateral symmetry priors with principal component mapping, SDE enables the synchronous evolution of complex biological morphology and control policies.  

> •

Accelerated Convergence and Multidimensional Dis-covery: We demonstrate through extensive experiments across four complex terrain scenarios that SDE leads to significantly faster learning convergence and superior stability compared to a fixed-morphology baseline and a direct-search co-design baseline. Notably, our findings reveal that the synergistic evolution of the three muscle parameters yields higher robustness than optimizing stiffness alone. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Musculoskeletal Control and Synergy 

Given the high-dimensional and overactuated nature of musculoskeletal robots, learning effective control policies has persistently been a significant challenge. Existing re-search mainly focuses on overcoming the control difficulties, proposing a variety of algorithms to simplify policy learning. One line of research seeks to augment exploration via well-designed noise mechanisms. For instance, DEP-RL [7] generates action-correlated noise with Differential Extrinsic Plasticity, and Lattice [8] applies temporally correlated noise to the policy’s latent state to induce cross-actuator synergies. Another line of work leverages muscle synergy priors to facilitate the learning process. SAR [9] transfers synergistic representations learned from simple tasks to complex tasks. DynSyn [10] uses random perturbations to generate syner-gistic representations from the system’s dynamical structure, achieving fast learning efficiency. Diff-Muscle [11] exploits the theory of differential flatness to analytically map the redundant muscle activation space onto a low-dimensional joint space, enabling efficient policy learning for highly dynamic robotic table tennis tasks. Although these methods significantly alleviate the learning burden for musculoskeletal systems, they universally rely on fixed-parameter models. By treating the morphology as a static constraint, existing research overlooks the potential to expand the robot’s mechanical capabilities through morpho-logical adaptation [12], [13]. To break this physical bottle-neck, our work shifts the focus toward the synergistic co-optimization of muscle physiological parameters alongside the control policy. 

B. Morphology-Control Co-design 

The co-design of morphology and control has gathered sig-nificant attention in recent years, as it simultaneously evolves morphological parameters and learns control policies to adapt to task-specific demands [14], [15]. Transform2Act [16] introduced a framework to modify skeletal attributes within the reinforcement learning loop. Subsequently, SARD [17] proposed a symmetry-aware robot design method that utilizes structured subgroups to search for optimal symmetry, effec-tively reducing the complexity of the design space. Build-ing on this, CompetEvo [18] incorporated morphological evolution into competitive scenarios by co-evolving agent designs and tactics in adversarial games. Recently, Body-Gen [19] advanced efficient embodiment co-design through topology-aware self-attention and temporal credit assignment mechanisms. Meanwhile, Bayesian [6] proposed Bayesian Morphology Optimization, which successfully evolves mus-cle parameters to enhance grasping performance. However, Bayesian Morphology Optimization simplifies the design space by evolving only a single physiological parameter, specifically stiffness, under the assumption that passive com-pliance is the dominant factor in task success. In contrast, dynamic locomotion across varied terrains requires a more holistic evolution of the muscle-tendon triad, comprising strength, velocity, and stiffness. Concurrently evolving these parameters in a high-dimensional space leads to severe efficiency bottlenecks, which our proposed Spectral Design Evolution framework addresses by reformulating the design problem into a low-dimensional spectral manifold search. III. P RELIMINARY 

A. Problem Formulation 

We formulate the musculoskeletal morphology-control co-optimization problem as an augmented Markov Deci-sion Process (MDP) defined by a 7-element tuple M =

⟨S , A, D, Φ, T , R, γ ⟩, where S ⊆ Rn represents the con-tinuous state space, A ⊆ Rd+e represent the actions for morphology design and muscle control conditioned on stage, and D ⊆ Rd is the muscle parameter design space. Φ is a discrete stage flag indicates whether the agent is currently in the process of evolving its morphology or executing physical movements. At design stage, the agent samples a morphological design action adt from design policy πθ based on the current state st to change the morphology: 

adt ∼ πθ (·| st). (1) At control stage, the agent samples an action aet from control policy πϕ which indicates the neural excitation: 

aet ∼ πϕ(·| st). (2) 

T (st+1 |st, a dt , a et ) is the transition function and R : S ×A → 

R is the reward function. The goal is to jointly learn the optimal design policy πθ

and control policy πϕ which maximizes the expected total discounted return: 

J(πθ , π ϕ) = Eτ ∼πθ ,π ϕ

" ∞X

> t=0

γtr(st, a t)

#

, (3) where γ ∈ [0 , 1) is discount factor, and T is the episode horizon. We optimize the policy with Proximal Policy Opti-mization (PPO) [20]. 

B. Musculoskeletal Modeling and Physiological Parameter-ization 

In this paper, we use the musculoskeletal models imple-mented in the MuJoCo physics simulator, where the muscle force fm is formulated as follows: 

fm = −(FL(L) · FV (V ) · a + FP (L)) · F0 (4) where FL(L) denotes the active force-length function, 

FV (V ) denotes the force-velocity function, and FP (L) de-notes the passive force that depends solely on the muscle length. a is the muscle activation value and F0 is the peak force at rest length. To enable morphological co-optimization, we parameterize the Hill-type muscle model across three critical physiological dimensions: strength ( σ), velocity ( ν), and stiffness ( κ). These parameters reshape the dimensionless characteristic curves that govern the instantaneous muscle force fm. 

> •

Strength ( σ): The peak isometric force F0 is physiolog-ically determined by the physiological cross-sectional area (PCSA). We introduce σ as a linear scaling factor to the reference peak force F ref  

> 0

:

F0(σ) = σ · F ref  

> 0

(5) where σ acts as a gain on the muscle’s output magni-tude. Increasing σ enhances the maximum load-bearing capacity without altering the temporal or restorative dynamics of the actuator.  

> •

Velocity ( ν): The force-velocity relationship FV char-acterizes the decline in force during muscle shortening. Let v be the absolute contraction velocity and vref max be the default intrinsic maximum velocity. We parameter-ize the normalized velocity ˜v using the scaling factor 

ν:

˜v = vν · vref max 

(6) Substituting this into the active force component, the force-velocity multiplier FV (˜ v) modulates the force output. Physiologically, ν represents the fiber-type com-position (e.g., fast-twitch vs. slow-twitch fibers). Ahigher ν increases the muscle’s functional bandwidth, allowing it to maintain substantial force output at higher shortening speeds, which is essential for explosive, high-power movements.  

> •

Stiffness (κ): The passive force FP represents the restorative tension provided by parallel elastic elements (e.g., connective tissues and titin). Following the non-linear elastic formulation [21], FP is defined by its exponential curvature κ:

FP (L, κ ) = max 



0, eκ·(L−1) − 1

eκ·(Lmax −1) − 1



(7) where L is the normalized muscle length. Here, κ serves as the passive stiffness coefficient. A larger κ dictates a sharper rise in resistive force as the muscle is stretched beyond its rest length ( L > 1). This parameterization allows the musculoskeletal system to exploit passive stability, by optimizing κ, the robot can achieve energy-efficient posture maintenance and joint limit protection through biomechanical impedance rather than active neural excitation. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

In this section, we present the Spectral Design Evolution 

(SDE) framework. The core idea is to project the high-dimensional, highly redundant muscle parameter space into a low-dimensional spectral manifold, followed by a two-stage co-optimization process for morphology and control. The overall architecture of the SDE framework is depicted in Fig. 2. It comprises an offline phase for spectral man-ifold construction and an online phase for two-stage co-optimization, where the design policy πθ and control policy 

πϕ are trained synchronously to adapt to diverse terrains. The overall procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Spectral Design Evolution (SDE)  

> 1:

Offline Phase: Dynamics-Aware Manifold Construc-tion  

> 2:

Execute random exploration to collect muscle length history H. 

> 3:

Apply Symmetry Grouping and record group-averaged lengths.  

> 4:

Perform Standardization and PCA to compute kine-matic basis Vk ∈ RM ×k. 

> 5:

Pre-compute expanded basis ˜Vk ∈ R3M ×3k (block-diagonal of Vk).  

> 6:

Online Phase: Two-Stage Co-optimization  

> 7:

Initialize design policy πθ and control policy πϕ. 

> 8:

for episode e = 1 , . . . , E do  

> 9:

Stage 1: Morphological Design ( t = 0 ) 

> 10:

Sample latent code z ∈ R3k ∼ πθ (z|s0). 

> 11:

Compute morphology Θ = ¯Θ + ˜Vkz. 

> 12:

Apply Θ to MuJoCo XML parameters ( σ, ν, κ ).  

> 13:

Stage 2: Locomotion Control ( t = 1 . . . T ) 

> 14:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 15:

Sample action at ∼ πϕ(at|st, Θ) and execute in MyoSuite.  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

Update θ and ϕ using PPO based on cumulative reward R. 

> 18:

end for Fig. 2: The SDE framework architecture. The process consists of an offline dynamics-aware manifold construction phase and an online two-stage co-optimization phase where the design policy πθ and control policy πϕ are optimized via shared reward signals. 

A. Complete Evolution Space Construction 

To enable full-body morphological adaptation, we first define a Complete Evolution Space Ω that encompasses all critical physiological traits of the musculoskeletal system. For a robot model with M symmetry-grouped muscles, the morphology is represented by a high-dimensional vector 

Θ ∈ R3M . Each muscle group i is characterized by its own triad θi = ( σi, ν i, κ i), which directly modifies the underlying MuJoCo simulation parameters:  

> •

Implementation Details: We target the muscle type actuators in the MuJoCo XML. The strength σ scales the gainprm[2] (Peak Force), the velocity ν scales the gainprm[6] (Max Velocity), and the stiffness κ

modifies the biasprm[2] (Passive Force Shape).  

> •

Evolutionary Bounds: To ensure biomechanical va-lidity and prevent simulation instability, we define a bounding box for each parameter. We set σ ∈ [0 .5, 1.5] 

and ν ∈ [0 .5, 1.5] as multipliers of the default values. For the stiffness shape parameter κ, we allow a range of [0 .5, 2.0] to account for the exponential sensitivity of passive tissues. 

B. Dynamics-Aware Spectral Design Space Construction 

As the number of muscles M increases (e.g., M = 40 

for a bipedal robot), the dimension of Ω reaches 120+ ,creating a severe “curse of dimensionality” for standard RL. This motivates our spectral manifold approach. Distinct from discrete grouping approaches, we utilize Principal Compo-nent Analysis (PCA) to construct a continuous spectral manifold that captures the underlying functional coupling of the musculoskeletal system. We posit that muscles ex-hibiting strong kinematic correlations should also follow coherent evolutionary constraints. This construction process corresponds to the Offline Phase (Lines 1–5) in Algorithm 1. 

1) Symmetry-Informed Grouping: To maintain biome-chanical plausibility and reduce exploration dimensionality, we incorporate a bilateral symmetry prior . For a bipedal robot, we enforce θleft ,i = θright ,i . This ensures that the evolved morphology remains balanced, preventing asymmet-ric gait patterns and ensuring stable forward locomotion. 

2) Dynamic Response Data Collection & Decomposition: 

We record symmetry-group averaged muscle lengths ¯Lt,i 

under random excitation at ∼ U (0 , 1) . The resulting stan-dardized history matrix ˜H ∈ RT ×M captures the muscu-loskeletal manifold. By performing spectral decomposition on the covariance matrix C = 1  

> T−1

˜H⊤ ˜H, we obtain the eigenvectors vi.

3) Spectral Manifold Mapping: Muscle properties in biological systems are coupled through functional syner-gies [22]. Utilizing PCA [23], we construct the kinematic projection matrix Vk = [ v1, . . . , vk] ∈ RM ×k from the top 

k eigenvectors. This basis captures the principal directions of functional muscle coordination, allowing the design policy to search within a compact, low-dimensional latent space 

z ∈ R3k (k ≪ M ) rather than individual parameters, significantly accelerating convergence. C. Two-Stage Co-optimization Strategy 

We decouple the co-optimization into a hierarchical se-quence within each episode. As summarized in Algorithm 1, this strategy implements the Online Phase of the SDE framework (Lines 6–16), where each episode is divided into two functional stages: a one-shot Morphological Design 

stage (Lines 9–12) and a multi-step Locomotion Control 

stage (Lines 13–16). Within this online phase, we adopt a design-before-control paradigm similar to Transform2Act, where the body configuration is first determined and then exploited by the control policy throughout the remaining rollout. Different from Transform2Act, which focuses on modifying skeletal structures and body layouts, our setting keeps the kinematic topology fixed and instead evolves continuous muscle physiological parameters on the spectral manifold. This formulation preserves the benefit of episodic design–control coupling while remaining naturally suited to musculoskeletal systems. 

1) Phase 1: Morphological Design: At t = 0 , the design policy πθ observes the initial state s0 and samples a latent code z ∈ R3k ∼ πθ (z|s0). We employ an expanded block-diagonal basis ˜Vk ∈ R3M ×3k to map this latent code to the full physiological space: 

Θ( z) = ¯Θ + 

Vk 0 00 Vk 00 0 Vk

zσ

zν

zκ

 , (8) where zσ , zν , zκ ∈ Rk. This construction ensures that strength, velocity, and stiffness are evolved through separate latent coordinates, while all three remain constrained by the same biomechanical synergy basis Vk.The resulting morphology vector Θ = ( σ, ν, κ) is then applied to the MuJoCo muscle parameters before any phys-ical interaction begins. By restricting the design action to a one-shot decision at the episode boundary, SDE avoids intra-episode non-stationarity in the body dynamics. As a result, the downstream controller interacts with a fixed morphology throughout the rollout, which stabilizes policy optimization and makes the long-term effect of a sampled design easier to evaluate. Moreover, because the design policy searches in a low-dimensional latent space rather than directly perturbing all 3M physiological parameters, it can focus on coordinated body-level adaptations instead of noisy per-muscle modifica-tions. 

2) Phase 2: Locomotion Control: Once Θ is fixed, the remainder of the episode becomes a standard locomotion problem conditioned on the instantiated morphology. The control policy πϕ generates muscle activations at at each step t:

at ∼ πϕ(at|st, Θ) , t = 1 , . . . , T. (9) Conditioning the controller on Θ is important for two rea-sons. First, it allows a single policy to adapt its actuation strategy to different evolved bodies, rather than requiring an independent controller for every candidate morphology. Sec-ond, it enables experience sharing across nearby designs on the spectral manifold, thereby improving sample efficiency during joint training. In practice, the controller learns not only how to move , but also how to exploit different strength– velocity–stiffness configurations for terrain-dependent loco-motion. After the rollout terminates, the cumulative reward is used to jointly update πθ and πϕ with PPO. The design action at t = 0 receives an episode-level credit signal reflecting the overall quality of the instantiated morphology, whereas the control actions receive dense temporal credit along the trajectory. This asymmetric yet shared optimization structure naturally matches the roles of the two policies: πθ performs global, low-frequency body adaptation, while πϕ performs local, high-frequency motor coordination. By reducing the morphological search space from 3M to 3k (e.g., from 240 to 15), SDE enables the efficient discovery of task-optimal bodies that substantially enhance locomotion stability and final task return. V. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we evaluate the performance of the pro-posed Spectral Design Evolution (SDE) framework through a series of locomotion tasks. Our evaluation focuses on answering the following research questions:  

> •

RQ1 (Efficiency): Does SDE facilitate faster conver-gence and higher task performance compared to fixed-morphology and other co-optimization baselines?  

> •

RQ2 (Synergy): Is the co-evolution of the full physio-logical triad (σ, ν, κ ) superior to optimizing individual parameters?  

> •

RQ3 (Symmetry): How does the bilateral symmetry prior affect the physical plausibility and stability of evolved locomotion?  

> •

RQ4 (Scalability): How does the latent dimension k

govern the trade-off between design expressivity and exploration efficiency? 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Task Environments: As illustrated in Fig. 3, we utilize the MyoLeg model (Fig. 3(a)) within the MyoSuite [24]. The model features 80 muscles and is tasked with navigating four distinct landscapes that challenge different aspects of musculoskeletal dynamics:  

> •

Walk (Fig. 3(b)): A flat terrain used to evaluate baseline cyclic gait stability and energy efficiency.  

> •

Rough (Fig. 3(c)): A terrain covered with stochastic debris, necessitating passive impact absorption and in-trinsic compliance ( κ).  

> •

Hilly (Fig. 3(d)): Undulating slopes that test the agent’s ability to adapt to varying gravitational loads.  

> •

Stair (Fig. 3(e)): A series of vertical steps requiring high explosive power ( σ) and precise foot placement. 

2) Baselines and Training: We compare SDE with two baselines:  

> •

Fixed Morphology , where only the control policy πϕ

is trained on a default musculoskeletal model.  

> •

Transform2Act (T2A) , which performs direct 240 Dmorphological search without spectral mapping. Fig. 3: Experimental setup and task environments in MyoSuite: (a) The MyoLeg model used for spectral analysis and co-optimization; (b) Walk terrain; (c) Rough terrain with stochastic debris; (d) Hilly terrain with undulating slopes; (e) 

Stair terrain with vertical obstacles.   

> (a) Walk. (b) Stair.
> (c) Hilly. (d) Rough.

Fig. 4: Learning curves across four terrains. SDE demon-strates superior adaptability, particularly in high-impedance tasks like Stair , Hilly and Rough .All policies are optimized using PPO with a shared reward signal R incorporating forward progress, balance mainte-nance, and energy effort penalties. 

B. Comparative Performance Analysis 

As illustrated in Fig. 4, we evaluate the learning ef-ficiency and final performance across four terrains. The results demonstrate that the SDE framework significantly outperforms both the Fixed and T2A baselines in terms of convergence speed and cumulative rewards. Specifically, we observe a clear performance distinction based on task complexity:  

> •

On Regular Terrain (Walk): T2A demonstrates com-petitive performance, eventually surpassing the Fixed 

baseline. This suggests that in simple environments, 

Fig. 5: Learning curves comparing full triad co-optimization against single-parameter evolution. The synergy between parameters contributes to adaptation across diverse terrains. direct co-optimization can eventually discover beneficial morphological adjustments.  

> •

On Complex Terrains (Stair, Hilly, Rough): The performance of T2A drops sharply, often remaining on par with the Fixed baseline throughout the training duration. This indicates that T2A is still struggling to explore the optimal morphological configuration within its unconstrained 240+ dimensional design space. In contrast, SDE exhibits faster convergence across all scenarios. By searching within a low-dimensional spectral manifold, SDE substantially alleviates the exploration burden caused by the high-dimensional design space faced by T2A .This enables the agent to identify task-relevant biomechani-cal synergies more efficiently, transforming high-dimensional morphological search into a more tractable latent-space co-optimization problem. 

C. Ablation Studies 1) Physiological Triad Co-optimization: To address RQ2 ,we evaluate the necessity of co-optimizing the full physio-logical triad (σ, ν, κ ) in Rough task by comparing it against variants where only a single parameter type is evolved: 

SDE-σ (Strength only), SDE-ν (Velocity only), and SDE-κ

(Stiffness only). As shown in Fig. 5, although single-parameter evolution provides marginal improvements over the Fixed baseline, it fails to match the performance of the full SDE framework. Notably, while the SDE-σ (Strength only) variant achieves a reward magnitude comparable to the full SDE framework, a qualitative analysis of the synthesized gait reveals a critical discrepancy. Video-based evaluation (Fig. 6) indicates that the SDE-σ

model exhibits an unnatural “scissor-gait”, where after the initial step, the musculoskeletal limbs remain in a crossed configuration, propelling the torso forward through syn-chronous hopping rather than coordinated, alternating strides. In contrast, the full SDE framework converges on a stable, alternating gait. This suggests that the three parameters do not contribute to locomotion in isolation but form a functional synergy. Specifically, while strength provides the necessary power, velocity ( ν) and stiffness ( κ) are essential Fig. 6: Qualitative comparison of evolved gaits: (Left) The 

full SDE framework emerges a stable, alternating bipedal gait with natural leg-swing phases. (Right) The SDE-σ (Strength-only) variant falls into a sub-optimal “scissor-gait”, where the limbs remain in a crossed configuration and the agent moves via hopping.         

> (a) σEvolution. (b) νEvolution.
> (c) κEvolution. (d) SDE (Full Triad).

Fig. 7: Radar charts showing the distributions of evolved muscle parameters across different muscle groups. (a-c) depict the evolution of individual parameters: strength ( σ), velocity ( ν), and stiffness ( κ), which exhibit fragmented and inconsistent adaptation across muscles. (d) shows the SDE-evolved full triad, highlighting a coordinated synergy where muscle parameters co-adapt in a physiologically plausible manner, enabling efficient and stable locomotion. for regulating the temporal coordination and passive dynam-ics required for natural, human-like walking. Figure 7 visualizes the distributions of evolved muscle parameters across different muscle groups. Subplots (a-c) show the single-parameter evolution of strength ( σ), velocity (ν), and stiffness ( κ) respectively. We observe that optimizing parameters independently often leads to fragmented adap-tation, with some muscle groups overcompensating while others remain under-optimized. In contrast, subplot (d) illus-trates the SDE approach co-evolving the full triad ( σ, ν, κ ). Here, muscle parameters exhibit a coherent, balanced pattern across groups, indicating physiologically plausible synergies that support more robust locomotion. These observations  

> (a) Walk Symmetry Ablation. (b) Rough Symmetry Ablation.

Fig. 8: Ablation study on bilateral symmetry. While SDE-Asym has higher degrees of freedom, the symmetry prior in SDE ensures more stable and physically plausible gait patterns. suggest that co-optimizing the triad helps avoid conflicting adaptations that may arise in single-parameter optimization. 

2) Impact of Bilateral Symmetry Prior: To address RQ3 ,we compare the standard SDE (Symmetric) with an asym-metric variant ( SDE-Asym ) in Walk and Rough tasks (Fig. 8).  

> •

Regular Environments (Walk): Enforcing bilateral symmetry provides a clear advantage. The symmetric variant converges faster and achieves a better final morphology. These results support the view that, for periodic and structured tasks, the symmetry prior serves as an effective inductive bias that aligns evolutionary exploration with balanced gait dynamics.  

> •

Irregular Environments (Rough): In stochastic envi-ronments characterized by unpredictable rough terrain, the advantage of the bilateral symmetry prior is less pronounced. While the SDE with bilateral symmetry still maintains stability, the performance gap between symmetric and asymmetric configurations narrows. This suggests that in non-periodic, high-impact interactions, the ability to perform asymmetric morphological com-pensations may be more tolerable, or even necessary, to absorb stochastic perturbations. 

3) Impact of Latent Dimension k: To address RQ4 , we investigate the sensitivity of SDE to the latent dimension k ∈{3, 5, 7, 9}, which corresponds to the number of principal components (PCs) retained in the spectral manifold. Before analyzing performance, we first construct the spectral mani-fold for each k. Specifically, we apply random perturbations to joint angles of the musculoskeletal robot and record the resulting muscle length trajectories across all muscles. This data captures the intrinsic dynamical correlations be-tween muscles under arbitrary excitation. We then perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the standardized muscle length history and retain the top k eigenvectors, forming a low-dimensional spectral manifold that represents coordinated muscle co-variation. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the cumulative explained variance of the spectral manifold rises sharply, with k = 3 already capturing 90 .13% of the original parameter space dynamics. A significant “elbow” effect occurs at k = 5 , where the captured variance reaches 98 .38% .The impact of this dimensionality on actual task perfor-mance is shown in Fig. 10. We observe that while k = 7 and Fig. 9: Cumulative explained variance of musculoskeletal dynamical response across different k. A distinct “elbow” is observed at k = 5 , capturing over 98% of the morphological variance. 

Fig. 10: Learning curves on the Rough task for different latent dimensions k. Although k = 7 and k = 9 offer higher theoretical expressivity, k = 5 achieves the most efficient balance between convergence speed and final reward. 

k = 9 eventually achieve slightly higher peak rewards, they exhibit slower initial convergence and higher variance across training seeds. Conversely, k = 3 suffers from under-fitting. 

Ultimately, k = 5 is selected as the default configuration for SDE. 

VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we introduced Spectral Design Evolution 

(SDE), a co-optimization framework that accelerates muscu-loskeletal robot synthesis by evolving a triad of physiological muscle parameters: strength, velocity, and stiffness. To over-come the curse of dimensionality in high-dimensional muscle spaces, SDE leverages bilateral symmetry priors and PCA-based spectral manifolds to project complex morphological traits into a compact latent space. Experimental evaluations across diverse and challeng-ing terrains demonstrate that SDE significantly outperforms fixed-morphology and standard co-optimization baselines in both convergence efficiency and locomotion stability. Abla-tion studies further validate that the synergistic evolution of the muscle triad, constrained by symmetry priors, is essential for achieving superior robustness. Future research will ex-plore multi-task scenarios, enabling universal design policies to dynamically adapt morphology for real-time transitions between heterogeneous environments. REFERENCES [1] F. E. Zajac, “Muscle and tendon: properties, models, scaling, and application to biomechanics,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng. , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 359–411, 1989. [2] S. H. Scott, “Optimal feedback control and the neural control of movement,” Nature Rev. Neurosci. , vol. 5, pp. 532–546, 2004. [3] V. Caggiano et al. , “MyoSuite: A platform for biomechanics with deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) ,2022. [4] R. Pfeifer and J. Bongard, How the Body Shapes the Way We Think .MIT Press, 2006. [5] K. S. Luck, J. Amor, and H. B. Amor, “Data-efficient co-adaptation of morphology and control with adaptive inference,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , 2020, pp. 2222–2228. [6] J. Zhao, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Bayesian morphology optimization for musculoskeletal systems,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) , 2023. [7] P. Schumacher, D. H¨ aufle, D. B¨ uchler, S. Schmitt, and G. Martius, “Dep-rl: Embodied exploration for reinforcement learning in overactu-ated and musculoskeletal systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00484 ,2022. [8] T. Simpson, M. Cenedese, I. Axas, and G. Haller, “Data-driven spectral submanifold reduction for nonlinear optimal control of high-dimensional robots,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5304– 5311, 2021. [9] A. S. Chiappa et al. , “Acquiring musculoskeletal skills with a hierar-chical reinforcement learning framework,” Neuron , 2024. [10] K. He, C. Zuo, and Y. Sui, “DynSyn: Dynamical synergistic repre-sentation for efficient learning and control,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) , 2024. [11] W. Zhao, J. Guo, K. Huang, X. Liu, and H. Liu, “Diff-muscle: Efficient learning for musculoskeletal robotic table tennis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08617 , 2026. [12] A. Seth et al. , “OpenSim: Simulating musculoskeletal dynamics and neuromuscular control,” PLoS Comput. Biol. , vol. 14, 2018. [13] X. B. Peng et al. , “DeepMimic: Example-guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based character skills,” ACM Trans. Graph. , 2018. [14] K. Sims, “Evolving 3D morphology and behavior by competition,” in 

Artificial Life IV , 1994, pp. 28–39. [15] H. Liu, D. Guo, and A. Cangelosi, “Embodied intelligence: A synergy of morphology, action, perception and learning,” ACM Comput. Surv. ,vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1–36, 2025. [16] Y. Yuan, Y. Song, and K. Kitani, “Transform2Act: Learning atransform-and-control policy for efficient agent design,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR) , 2022. [17] H. Dong, J. Zhang, T. Wang, and C. Zhang, “Symmetry-aware robot design with structured subgroups,” in Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) , 2023. [18] K. Huang, D. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Ji, and H. Liu, “Competevo: Towards morphological evolution from competition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18300 , 2024. [19] H. Lu, Z. Wu, J. Xing, J. Li, R. Li, Z. Li, and Y. Shi, “BodyGen: Advancing towards efficient embodiment co-design,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR) , 2025. [20] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [21] M. Millard, T. Uchida, A. Seth, and S. L. Delp, “Flexing computational muscle: Modeling and simulation of musculotendon dynamics,” J. Biomech. Eng. , vol. 135, no. 2, p. 021005, 2013. [22] G. d’Avella et al. , “Combinations of muscle synergies in the construc-tion of a natural motor repertoire,” Nature Neurosci. , vol. 6, 2003. [23] M. Santello, M. Flanders, and J. F. Soechting, “Postural hand synergies for tool use,” J. Neurosci. , vol. 18, pp. 10 105–10 115, 1998. [24] A. Vittori, V. Caggiano, et al. , “MyoSuite: A contact-rich simulation suite for musculoskeletal motor control,” in Proc. 5th Conf. Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2022.