Title: MiNI-Q: A Miniature, Wire-Free Quadruped with Unbounded, Independently Actuated Leg Joints

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.11537v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 00:28:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# MiNI-Q: A Miniature, Wire-Free Quadruped with Unbounded, Independently Actuated Leg Joints 

Daniel Koh 1,* , Suraj Shah 1,* , Yufeng Wu 1, and Dennis Hong 1

Abstract —Physical joint limits are common in legged robots and can restrict workspace, constrain gait design, and increase the risk of hardware damage. This paper introduces MiNI-Q2, a miniature, wire-free quadruped robot with independently actuated, mechanically unbounded 2-DOF leg joints. We present the mechanical design, kinematic analysis, and experimental validation of the proposed robot. The leg mechanism enables both oscillatory gaits and rotary locomotion while allowing the robot to fold to a minimum height of 2.5 cm. Experimentally, MiNI-Q achieves speeds up to 0.46 m/s and demonstrates low-clearance crawling, stair climbing, inverted locomotion, jumping, and backflipping. The wire-free architecture extends our previ-ous Q8bot design [1], improving assembly reliability at miniature scale. All mechanical and electrical design files are released open source to support reproducibility and further research. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Legged robots are suitable for navigating complex environ-ments effectively due to their adaptability to unknown terrains [2]. Over the past decade, we have seen significant advance-ments in legged robotics, including novel leg mechanisms [3], [4], integrated actuators [5], and locomotion control [6]. The mechanisms used in multi-legged robots can be cate-gorized into serial, parallel and hybrid topologies [7]. Serial mechanisms mimic animal and human anatomy, and have the advantages of simplified kinematics, compact size, and larger workspace. On the contrary, parallel mechanisms are sometimes implemented for their higher stiffness and lower leg inertia, with the trade-off of reduced workspace and com-plex kinematics [8]. Most existing legged robots have finite joint ranges. Electrically, dynamically moving connections add strains to cables, posing a risk of failure over time. While parallel mechanisms mitigate this issue by keeping joint actuators stationary relative to the robot base [9], [10], mechanical hard stops remain common across both serial and parallel leg designs. These hard stops can damage hardware when improper motion commands exceed the robot’s physical workspace. Joint limits in some serial linkages can be extended through careful cable routing [11], [12], but are difficult to eliminate entirely unless special components are used, such as slip rings [13], which adds significant cost and complexity to legged mechanisms. Parallel mechanisms, like a five-bar linkage, can eliminate joint limits through coaxial joint placement, a practice that is common in wheel–leg transformable robots 

> 1

All authors are with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. {danielkoh1, surajnshah, ericyufengwu, dennishong }@g.ucla.edu .

> ∗

Denotes equal contribution. 

> 2

Project page: https://github.com/RoMeLaUCLA/miniq-public 

Fig. 1: MiNI-Q, a miniature quadruped robot featuring a 2R leg mechanism designed to remove conventional joint limits. 

that combine the advantages both locomotion modalities [14], [15]. In these designs, circular rims are attached to the five-bar linkage, which forms a wheel-like profile at specific joint configurations. The coaxial placement of the actuators enables continuous joint rotation, allowing the robot to travel in wheeled mode on flat terrains. However, the underlying mechanism is biased toward wheeled operation, which re-sulted in limited legged capability in reachable workspace and achievable gait variations. Stanford Doggo uses a similar coaxial drive assembly that allows unlimited rotation of its leg linkages [10], but the associated advantages was not explicitly studied. Separately, other research has demonstrated the benefits of continuously rotating joints in purely legged robots. For example, work on NaBi explored a continuously rotating knee joint on a bipedal robot, which enabled the robot to step over doorsills, climb stairs, and traverse obstacles [16]. These results suggest that continuous joint rotation can do more than protecting the robot from mechanical damages. It can also enhance legged locomotion itself, independent of any wheeled transformation. Building on these insights, we explore a legged robot mechanism in which both the shoulder and knee joints are independently actuated and unbounded. We realize our design through a miniature-scale robot, MiNI-Q, to validate the concept while keeping the potential to generalize to larger-sized applications. The main contributions of this paper are:  

> •

A compact, wire-free quadruped robot architecture as an evolution of the Q8bot design [1].  

> •

A two-degree-of-freedom, belt-driven leg mechanism without physical joint limits. 

> arXiv:2603.11537v1 [cs.RO] 12 Mar 2026 Fig. 2: Mechanical design of MiNI-Q. (a) Overall dimensions in nominal and folded configurations. (b) Exploded view of the robot assembly. (c) Detail of MiNI-Q’s 2R leg mechanism enabling unbounded joint rotation. The lower leg linkage is designed to be easily swappable using a single screw, allowing for testing with different contact geometry and materials.

TABLE I: Physical specifications of Q8bot and MiNI-Q.                             

> Specifications Q8bot MiNI-Q
> Mass (g) 220 240 Nominal Dimension (cm) 14 ×7×713.8 ×9.2 ×5.7 Folded Dimension (cm) 12 ×7×513.8 ×9.2 ×2.5 Body Length (cm) 88.8 Maximum Clearance (cm) 5.8 5.8

II. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Hardware Design 

MiNI-Q is a shorthand for ”Miniature, No-wire, Intelligent Quadruped”. As shown in Fig. 2, the robot features a re-designed chassis that adopts a similar, wire-free topology as its predecessor, Q8bot. An integrated printed circuit board (PCB) is mounted on top of the chassis frame, and 8 DY-NAMIXEL XL330-M077-T actuators are directly mounted to the frame after removing their back covers and output horns. 4 identical leg assemblies are then mounted to their respective actuator pairs to form the complete robot. Table I compares the physical specifications of Q8bot and MiNI-Q. With its actuators all mounted horizontally, the overall folded height is smaller than that of Q8bot. As a design evolution of Q8bot, MiNI-Q reuses the same DYNAMIXEL actuators. With both the electrical and me-chanical design files released as open-source, users who have previously built Q8bot can upgrade to MiNI-Q at a fraction of the original system cost. The 2R leg mechanism of MiNI-Q uses accessible, off-the-shelf hardware combined with components fabricated on a hobby-grade FDM printer using PLA filament. A 0.2mm stainless steel nozzle was used to increase in-plane resolution, resulting in improved geometric accuracy for features such as gears, pulleys, and servo horn teeth. As shown in Fig. 3, MiNI-Q’s integrated PCB represents a noticeable improvement over that of Q8bot. The off-the-

> Fig. 3: Electronics system overview of MiNI-Q

shelf Seeed Studio XIAO ESP32C3 module was replaced by an ESP32C3-MINI system-in-package with a built-in PCB antenna, which further simplifies assembly. The battery configuration was updated from a 1S parallel arrangement to a 2S serial configuration. This allowed the use of a 6V step-down converter instead of a 5V boost converter. According to the actuator datasheet, operating at 6.0 V instead of 5.0V increases the rated stall torque by approximately 6% and the no-load speed by approximately 19% [17]. In addition, an onboard lithium-ion battery charger and a BNO055 inertial measurement unit (IMU) were added to make the robot fully self-contained. An I 2C bus connects the charger integrated circuit and the IMU to the microcontroller for data exchange, and a Qwiic connector was added to enable future expansion with additional sensors on the same bus [18]. Due to its compact form factor and narrow, double-sided layout, MiNI-Q’s custom integrated PCB is not well suited for manual pick-and-place assembly without professional reflow equipment. To improve accessibility and lower the barrier to replication, the components in the bill of materials were selected to be fully compatible with JLCPCB’s automated assembly service, eliminating the need for manual assembly or traditional turnkey quoting. The most notable difference between Q8bot and MiNI-Q is the introduction of a joint-limit-free leg mechanism, shown in Fig. 2(c). The hip joint is directly driven by the first Fig. 4: Kinematic diagram of MiNI-Q leg: A 2R linkage with custom joint-to-actuator mapping. q1, q 2 denote the kinematic joint angles, whereas θ1, θ 2

> represent the corresponding actuator angles.

actuator, while the knee joint is remotely actuated through a transmission by a second actuator mounted rigidly relative to the first. This actuator drives a helical gear, which in turn moves a compound idler consisting of a matching helical gear stage and an integrated timing belt pulley. An MXL timing belt routes through the upper leg linkage, tensioned by a miniature ball bearing, and finally drives the lower leg linkage via the knee pulley. The resulting mechanism avoids physical overlap and interference between transmission stages, allowing both joints to rotate continuously. Unlike conventional coaxial five-bar leg designs, in which continuous joint rotation can only be achieved under coupled motion, our proposed design enables independent, unbounded rotation of each joint. 

B. Kinematic and Workspace Analysis 

The inverse kinematics of the proposed 2R leg mechanism can be computed by first solving for the classical 2R ma-nipulator solution in a theoretical joint space, then apply a joint-to-actuator mapping matrix. A kinematic diagram for this mechanism is shown in Fig.4. Knowing the leg lengths, l1, l 2, and given position x, y 

within the workspace, kinematic joint variables q1, q 2 can be found by deriving the standard solution resulting in the following equations 

q1

q2



=

atan2( y, x ) − atan2( l2

√1 − D2, l 1 + l2D)atan2( ±√1 − D2, D )



(1) where 

D = x2 + y2 − l21 − l22

2l1l2

(2) The relationship between the kinematic joint variables q =[q1 q2]⊤ and the actuator variables θ = [ θ1 θ2]⊤ is given by 

θ = A−1q, A−1 =

1 01 1



. (3) With this kinematic configuration, we can choose an elbow orientation depending on the gait. This also provides MiNI-Q with the ability to continue moving even after it is flipped over by switching the elbow configuration. This is further explored in section III-B. 

> Fig. 5: MiNI-Q’s serial linkage workspace overlay-ed on top of Q8bot’s parallel linkage workspace.

With the equal length, serial configuration of the legs, the reachable workspace of MiNI-Q becomes a circle with a radius of the sum of the leg lengths. By avoiding leg interference with itself, MiNI-Q can move at a larger range of heights relative to it’s size. This is further explored in section III-B. In comparison, Q8Bot’s 5 bar, parallel linkage mechanism has a much smaller workspace [1], as seen in Fig. 5. In addition to the workspace diagram, due to tolerance and mechanical limitations, the true workspace ends up being smaller than predicted. These differences matter when considering the locomotion of each quadruped. Since Q8bot is a parallel mechanism, the leg has a limited amount of vertical travel without any horizontal displacement, making it more difficult to navigate rough terrain and steps. MiNI-Q does not suffer from this limitation because it can move vertically until reaching the maximum extension defined by the leg lengths. 

C. Jacobian Analysis 

The Jacobian of the proposed leg mechanism can be computed following a similar workflow. We first express the forward kinematics of the classical 2R manipulator as 

p =

xy



=

l1 cos θ1 + l2 cos( θ1 + θ2)

l1 sin θ1 + l2 sin( θ1 + θ2)



(4) The Jacobian in the theoretical joint space is obtained by direct differentiation of equation (4): 

Jq =



∂x ∂q 1

∂x ∂q 2

∂y ∂q 1

∂y ∂q 2

 . (5) Finally, the actuator-space Jacobian is computed by apply-ing the joint-to-actuator mapping: 

Jθ (θ) = Jq (q) A. (6) Fig. 6: Yoshikawa manipulability across the workspace of a regular 2R leg and MiNI-Q’s coupled leg mechanism (lighter color represents higher manipulability). 

The Yoshikawa manipulability index is one of the most popular methods in evaluating the dexterity of a manipulator [19]. The index is calculated as: 

w(θ) = 

q

det  J(θ) J(θ)⊤ (7) We plotted the Yoshikawa manipulability of a regular 2R leg next to that of MiNI-Q’s coupled leg, and the results are shown in Fig. 6. The regular 2R leg shows a radially symmet-ric manipulability distribution, with peak dexterity occurring in a fixed distance away from the workspace origin. While the coupled 2R leg mechanism does not increase peak ma-nipulability, it effectively redistributes dexterity which could be utilized to optimize trajectories that enhance locomotion capability. 

D. Software and Control 

The MiNI-Q control architecture closely follows Q8bot, which the interested reader can refer to for detailed expla-nations and results [20]. One significant modification is the implementation of the FreeRTOS framework to provide multi-task scheduling on the robot, enabling teleoperated control while simultaneously collecting real time sensor measure-ments without introducing latency or code blocking. Additionally, we developed a control scheme allowing us to rapidly switch between extended position mode and velocity mode on the DYNAMIXEL motors. This allows MiNI-Q to transition from traditional oscillating gaits to high-speed rotary locomotion. As a result, the limbs can function as eccentric wheels, enabling the robot to traverse through variable terrain. III. R ESULTS 

A. Locomotion Performance 

To evaluate locomotion performance, we set up MiNI-Q to traverse in a straight line using different gait configurations. A video analysis software was used to extract the steady-state velocity of the robot [21], while IMU orientation angle and current draw were recorded at a frequency between 15-20 Hz. The IMU data for roll and pitch of MiNI-Q is shown for the fast and high trot gaits in Fig. 7. Gait stability was calculated from the standard deviation of the roll and pitch angles measured from the IMU. Gait efficiency was quantified using the Cost of Transport (COT), computed from the robot mas m, steady-state velocity vss ,

> (a)
> (b) Fig. 7: Comparison of two trot gaits. (a) Fast trot. (b) High trot. Top: sequential snapshots of the robot over one gait cycle. Bottom: measured IMU pitch (blue) and roll (red) angles versus time.

TABLE II: Quadruped Performance Comparison               

> Robot Top Speed Normalized Top Speed Cost of Transport (COT)
> MiNI-Q 0.46 m/s 5.22 7.1
> Q8Bot [1] 0.43 m/s 5.38 6.04 Chen et al. [22] 0.52 m/s 4.4 3.2 Doggo [10] 0.8 m/s 2.14 3.2

average current consumption i, and input voltage V (using a nominal supply voltage of 6.0 V): 

COT = V i mgv ss 

(8) The results for various gaits are summarized in Table III. All locomotion gaits exhibited stable performance, with body orientation deviating by a maximum of 2.19 degrees. The high-trot gait achieved the lowest COT of 7.1 at a speed of 0.16 m/s, while the fast trot reached a top speed of 0.46 m/s with a COT of 8.1. While the COT values are high relative to other legged robots, the normalized speed is comparable to Q8bot, which outperforms most existing quadrupeds (Table II). The increase in COT relative to Q8bot can be attributed to the transition to a coupled serial linkage driven by a belt transmission. The parallel five-bar linkage of Q8bot distributes load and reduces the torque requirements per actuator, providing a mechanical advantage that is not present TABLE III: MiNI-Q COT Table                           

> Gait Type Steady State Velocity Vss
> Normalized Velocity Average Current Draw Cost of Transport (COT) Pitch Standard Deviation Roll Standard Deviation Slow Trot 0.12 m/s 1.36 0.543 A 11.5 2.15 2.19 Fast Trot 0.46 m/s 5.22 1.473 A 8.1 1.57 1.25 High Trot 0.16 m/s 1.81 0.449 A 7.1 0.73 0.80
> Crawl 0.03 m/s 0.32 0.220 A 19.7 0.85 1.10

MiNI-Q. Furthermore, the transmission drive for the distal serial link introduces energy loss due to internal friction and backlash. This marginal reduction in performance was an accepted design trade-off to achieve an unconstrained leg workspace, as demonstrated in the following section. 

B. Novel Locomotion 1) Terrain Navigation : Leveraging the expanded workspace of MiNI-Q’s coupled linkage design, we achieved locomotion capabilities previously restricted by parallel hardware constraints. In Fig. 10a, the height of each step is 55 mm which is 2.2 times the body height of MiNI-Q. This gait utilizes a hybrid approach with a pre-programmed sequence for the robot to place its front legs onto the step, then switching to a special manual gait that allows the user to walk the robot forward. Once the robot reaches the step’s edge, a final automated sequence lifts the rear legs to complete the ascent. We also introduce a low crawl gait, designed to minimize the robot’s vertical profile for navigating confined spaces. As shown in Fig. 10b, the robot successfully traverses a 45mm vertical gap by lowering its chassis to hover just millimeters above the ground. This gait takes advantage of a mixed configuration of legs with its front legs in a elbow flipped position. Rocky and loose terrain is difficult for Q8bot’s parallel legs. With the unlimited workspace and the DYNAMIXEL actuators, we are able to perform continuous rotation which enables us to navigate through gravel, sand, and other loose terrain. As shown in Fig. 10c, MiNI-Q was able to move through the pebbled field at a speed of 0.13 m/s. In contrast, the fast trot gait performed 3 times slower at a speed of 0.038 m/s. The continuous rotation gait with the extended legs provides a larger contact area on the loose surface which prevents the legs from sinking into the ground and slowing down. Similar to the fast trot gait, Q8bot’s legs have a single point of contact and are therefore expected to perform similarly on loose terrain. 

2) Other Capabilities : In addition to traversing terrains out of reach of Q8bot, MiNI-Q can also perform similar actions. Q8bot is stated to have a peak jump height of 70 mm [1]. MiNI-Q, on the other hand, can reach a peak height of 220 mm as seen in Fig. 8. MiNI-Q can also perform a jumping backflip as seen in Fig. 10d, a maneuver Q8bot cannot replicate. Q8bot’s parallel legs have a restricted vertical workspace resulting in a shorter acceleration stroke. MiNI-Q’s serial legs allow for a applying 

> Fig. 8: MiNI-Q jumping where each black and white strip is 10 mm. Peak height is 220 mm.
> Fig. 9: MiNI-Q standing in standard position (Left) and inverted position (Right).

force to a more favorable location farther away to help with the flipping action. Additionally, as mentioned before in Fig. 6, the coupled legs retain high control authority at extended positions, which allows the robot to effectively stabilize itself with outstretched legs when landing. Additionally, with its onboard IMU sensor, MiNI-Q can identify its orientation. One of the main benefits of the unlimited workspace of MiNI-Q can be seen by it’s ability to flip its legs around when it is upside down. If MiNI-Q ends up flipped over, within 0.5 seconds, it can bring its legs down and continue every gait as normal, including the aforementioned climbing stairs, low crawl, and even backflip. An example of MiNI-Q in its inverted state can be seen in Fig. 9. IV. D ISCUSSION 

A. Design Choices 

Unlike quadrupeds with bulky top-mounted components or asymmetric ”elbow” offsets, MiNI-Q is compact and symmetric about its horizontal plane. This mechanical design ensures that the vertical clearance between the chassis and the ground remains consistent in both orientations. This symmetry enables all gaits to perform with equal effectiveness should the robot end up in an inverted orientation. Part of the initial design choice involved making the bottom leg link easily swappable with a single screw, as seen in Fig. 2 (c). This is useful when conducting experiments on (a) Stair Climbing     

> (b) Low Clearance
> (c) Gravel Traversal
> (d) Backflip Maneuver Fig. 10: Demonstrations of MiNI-Q locomotion capabilities. (a) Stair climbing up steps 2.2×the robot’s body height. (b) Low-clearance traversal through a45 mm gap. (c) Locomotion on pebbled terrain using the continuous rotation gait. (d) Jumping backflip maneuver.

different terrains and need to adjust the traction of the robot. Additionally, the hybrid tip consists of both rubber and plastic surfaces, allowing the robot to adapt to varying traction requirements. By switching between an ’elbow-in’ or ’elbow-out’ posture, the robot effectively selects which material contacts the ground, allowing for high performance locomotion depending on the terrain environment. 

B. Limitations 

The experiments were limited to open loop control, with joint trajectories pre-calculated on a host laptop. This archi-tecture was necessitated by the processing constraints of the ESP32-C3 microcontroller, which can experience significant scheduling delays within the FreeRTOS framework when con-currently managing ESP-NOW communication with the host, half-duplex DYNAMIXEL servo actuation, and sensor data polling. Although these latency issues were mitigated through code optimization and offboard computation, this approach limits the robot’s ability to respond to abrupt changes in orientation or variations in terrain. Additionally, the fidelity of the current sensors within the DYNAMIXEL actuators remains a point of investigation. These sensors may be subject to noise that affects the pre-cision of the COT calculation. Furthermore, while the bus voltage was assumed to be constant at 6.0 V for simplification, fluctuations in battery voltage and back-EMF generated by the actuators can introduce minor discrepancies between the calculated and actual power draw. 

C. Future Work 

To address the current limitations in control and data accuracy, future work will involve a comprehensive overhaul of the integrated PCB design. The primary upgrade involves transitioning to the ESP32-S3 dual-core microcontroller to facilitate the strategic partitioning of time-critical tasks to eliminate scheduling conflicts. Additionally, to ensure high-accuracy metrics, we plan to integrate current-shunt monitors such as the INA260 into the power bus. Finally, a UART header will be included for integration with a single board computer (SBC), enabling the transition to advanced control architecture using middleware systems such as the Robot Operating System (ROS). Leveraging this enhanced computational and sensing hard-ware, future experiments will focus on the implementation of closed-loop locomotion strategies. As MiNI-Q lacks ded-icated tactile or contact sensors, we intend to investigate the feasibility of proprioceptive contact sensing to maintain the simplicity of a no-wire design. Using high-fidelity current data from the INA260 sensors, we can analyze transient torque impulses and deviations in motor velocity to infer contact events. Beyond reactive control, we aim to employ machine learn-ing techniques to further optimize locomotion efficiency. Specifically, we plan to explore Reinforcement Learning (RL) frameworks to train robust locomotion policies. Prior work by Fu et al. demonstrated that learning to minimize mechanical energy promotes the emergence of natural, efficient locomo-tion gaits across diverse terrain settings [23]. Building upon this, we intend to implement a learning and sim-to-real frame-work for MiNI-Q to realize non-intuitive locomotion patterns that a manually tuned open-loop controller might overlook. By benchmarking our robot using the COT established in this paper, we can further evaluate the impact of our serial linkage design and determine its efficacy in achieving energy-optimal locomotion compared to conventional architectures. Finally, we intend to pivot to practical applications of the MiNI-Q platform. Future efforts will utilize the onboard SBC to implement computer vision and localization for autonomous navigation in unstructured environments. Fur-thermore, given the platform’s low cost design, we intend to explore swarm robotics, using Ultra Wide Band (UWB) for position triangulation and communication to perform collaborative tasks. These investigations will transition MiNI-Q from an isolated mechanical study to a robust testbed for intelligent locomotion and navigation. V. C ONCLUSION 

MiNI-Q extends the wire-free architecture set forth by Q8bot. Its unique, independently actuated serial leg mech-anism creates an unlimited workspace opening up the pos-sibility of novel gaits and locomotion. Such examples are stair climbing, backflipping, continuous rotation, and low clearance crawling. Experimental results validated the robot’s performance, demonstrating stable locomotion with a nor-malized top speed of 5.22 body lengths per second and a COT comparable to existing miniature platforms. While the transition to a serial linkage introduced minor trade-offs in energy efficiency due to transmission losses, this was outweighed by the functional benefits of an unconstrained workspace. The wire-free architecture and open-source design lower the barrier to entry for research in legged robotics, providing a robust and accessible platform for studying novel gait generation and control strategies. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors would like to thank Jessica Yang for her help in creating the spatial calibration grid, which was used in various experiments. Additionally, they would like to thank the UCLA Engineering Makerspace for provided resources to build parts of the experimental setup. REFERENCES [1] Y. Wu and D. Hong, “Design of q8bot: A miniature, low-cost, dynamic quadruped built with zero wires,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 8820–8825, 2025. [2] S. Azeez, R. K. Mandava, and N. S. Naik, “A novel review on quadruped robots design variants, gait modulation, and motion planning schemes,” Journal of Field Robotics , 2025. [3] K. G. Gim, J. Kim, and K. Yamane, “Design of a serial-parallel hybrid leg for a humanoid robot,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 6076–6081, 2018. [4] A. T. Spr¨ owitz, A. Tuleu, M. Ajallooeian, M. Vespignani, R. M¨ ockel, P. Eckert, M. D’Haene, J. Degrave, A. Nordmann, B. Schrauwen, et al. ,“Oncilla robot: a versatile open-source quadruped research robot with compliant pantograph legs,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 5, p. 67, 2018. [5] T. Zhu, J. Hooks, and D. Hong, “Design, modeling, and analysis of a liquid cooled proprioceptive actuator for legged robots,” in 2019 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mecha-tronics (AIM) , pp. 36–43, 2019. [6] S. Ha, J. Lee, M. van de Panne, Z. Xie, W. Yu, and M. Khadiv, “Learning-based legged locomotion: State of the art and future per-spectives,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 1396–1427, 2025. [7] J. He and F. Gao, “Mechanism, actuation, perception, and control of highly dynamic multilegged robots: A review,” Chinese Journal of Mechanical Engineering , vol. 33, no. 1, p. 79, 2020. [8] D. Mronga, S. Kumar, and F. Kirchner, “Whole-body control of series-parallel hybrid robots,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 228–234, 2022. [9] Y. Xu, Z. Luo, X. Bai, H. Xie, Y. Zhu, S. Chen, and J. Shang, “Design and experiments of a human-leg-inspired omnidirectional robotic leg,” 

Journal of Bionic Engineering , vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 2570–2589, 2023. [10] N. Kau, A. Schultz, N. Ferrante, and P. Slade, “Stanford doggo: An open-source, quasi-direct-drive quadruped,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 6309–6315, 2019. [11] Y. H. Lee, Y. H. Lee, H. Lee, H. Kang, J. H. Lee, L. T. Phan, S. Jin, Y. B. Kim, D.-Y. Seok, S. Y. Lee, H. Moon, J. C. Koo, and H. R. Choi, “Development of a quadruped robot system with torque-controllable modular actuator unit,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics ,vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 7263–7273, 2021. [12] F. Grimminger, A. Meduri, M. Khadiv, J. Viereck, M. W¨ uthrich, M. Naveau, V. Berenz, S. Heim, F. Widmaier, T. Flayols, J. Fiene, A. Badri-Spr¨ owitz, and L. Righetti, “An open torque-controlled modular robot architecture for legged locomotion research,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3650–3657, 2020. [13] D. Billings and S. Potter, “Electrical transfer assemblies for robotic devices.” U.S. Patent US20240181661A1, June 2024. [14] Y. Xue, X. Yuan, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Lu, B. Zhang, J. Lai, J. Wang, and X. Xiao, “Lywal: a leg-wheel transformable quadruped robot with picking up and transport functions,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 2935–2941, 2021. [15] C. Sun, G. Yang, S. Yao, Q. Liu, J. Wang, and X. Xiao, “Rhex-t3: A transformable hexapod robot with ladder climbing function,” 

IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1939– 1947, 2023. [16] S. Ghassemi and D. Hong, “Investigation of a novel continuously rotating knee mechanism for legged robots,” in 2018 15th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR) , pp. 130–135, 2018. [17] ROBOTIS, XL330-M077-T e-Manual , 2026. Online technical manual. [18] C. Bell, “Introducing qwiic and stemma qt,” in Beginning IoT Projects: Breadboard-less Electronic Projects , pp. 217–258, Springer, 2021. [19] T. Yoshikawa, “Manipulability of robotic mechanisms,” The interna-tional journal of Robotics Research , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 3–9, 1985. [20] Y. Wu and D. Hong, “Remote gait computation and wireless data col-lection on the q8bot miniature quadruped,” in 2025 22nd International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR) , pp. 362–367, 2025. [21] D. Brown and A. J. Cox, “Innovative uses of video analysis,” The Physics Teacher , vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 145–150, 2009. [22] F. Chen, W. Tao, and D. M. Aukes, “Development of a dynamic quadruped with tunable, compliant legs,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 495– 502, 2023. [23] Z. Fu, A. Kumar, J. Malik, and D. Pathak, “Minimizing energy consumption leads to the emergence of gaits in legged robots,” 2021.