Title: Relative State Estimation using Event-Based Propeller Sensing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18289v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:57:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Relative State Estimation using Event-Based Propeller Sensing 

Ravi Kumar Thakur*, Luis Granados Segura, Jan Klivan, Radim ˇ Spetl´ ık Tobi´ aˇ s Vinkl´ arek, Matouˇ s Vrba, Martin Saska 

Abstract —Autonomous swarms of multi-Unmanned Aerial Ve-hicle (UAV) system requires an accurate and fast relative state estimation. Although monocular frame-based camera methods perform well in ideal conditions, they are slow, suffer scale ambiguity, and often struggle in visually challenging conditions. The advent of event cameras addresses these challenging tasks by providing low latency, high dynamic range, and microsecond-level temporal resolution. This paper proposes a framework for relative state estimation for quadrotors using event-based propeller sensing. The propellers in the event stream are tracked by detection to extract the region-of-interests. The event streams in these regions are processed in temporal chunks to estimate per-propeller frequencies. These frequency measurements drive a kinematic state estimation module as a thrust input, while camera-derived position measurements provide the update step. Additionally, we use geometric primitives derived from event streams to estimate the orientation of the quadrotor by fitting an ellipse over a propeller and backprojecting it to recover body-frame tilt-axis. The existing event-based approaches for quadro-tor state estimation use the propeller frequency in simulated flight sequences. Our approach estimates the propeller frequency under 3% error on a test dataset of five real-world outdoor flight sequences, providing a method for decentralized relative localization for multi-robot systems using event cameras. 

Index Terms —Event Camera, Autonomous Swarms, Frequency Estimation, Relative Localization 

I. INTRODUCTION Autonomous formation flight of a multi-robot aerial swarms requires that robots estimate the states of others accurately. In an aerial swarm, the robots can interact with each other to pursue a common goal. Accurate estimation of linear and rotational kinematic states is necessary to enable multi-robot coordination by performing collision avoidance, infer intent, predicting trajectories and maintaining relative poses with respect to each other. This is commonly achieved by explicit communication between them [1] or by using relative localiza-tion through various sensing modalities [2]–[4]. Most forma-tion flights involving quadrotors rely on robust communication systems to exchange state information. However, performance can be degraded in the presence of communication latency or packet loss, and in some cases, the stability of formation may be compromised. To solve this problem, we propose event-based propeller sensing to estimate the relative states of quadrotors, thus enabling decentralized swarm flight in environmentally challenging conditions  

> Authors are with the Department of Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Karlovo Namesti 13, 121 35 Prague 2, Czechia. *Corresponding author:

ravi.thakur@cvut.cz 

> This work was funded by the Czech Science Foundation (GA ˇ CR) under research project no. 26-22419S
> Fig. 1. Visuals of a quadrotor in-flight as seen in pseudo-frame representation of streams accumulated from the event camera.

For an autonomous swarm flight to be resilient it needs the quadrotors to interact locally with limited communication, typically based on vision-based perception. However, vision-based methods rely on a frame-based RGB camera which records the light intensity per pixel for every frame. The frame-based camera has low temporal resolution, high latency, and low dynamic range in comparison to event cameras. These limitations make it a less suitable choice for vision-based state estimation where the environment introduces motion blur, extreme illumination changes, and background noise due to clutter. Thus, frame-based cameras introduce limitations for multi-robot formation flight of autonomous aerial swarms in a perceptually challenging environment. To address the limitations of frame-based cameras in multi-robot formation flight of aerial swarms, our work relies on event cameras. These sensors are low-powered and operate at high frequency [5]. The sensor area is activated only when there is a change in the visual appearance of the scene. The event streams are generated by any motion in the sensor area. Due to these advantages, event cameras are considered for autonomous navigation tasks where there are dynamic obstacles and the quadrotors are moving at high speed [6], [7]. Such an autonomous swarm quadrotor system has many applications. It can provide support for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief missions, survey a large area, and gather spatial intelligence. It can enable planetary exploration with less dependence on the orbiter spacecraft. This system is robust against individual failure and provides efficient spatial coverage for exploration. It can reduce dependency on the 

> arXiv:2604.18289v1 [cs.RO] 20 Apr 2026

orbiter spacecraft for navigation. The distributed network of flying robots can act as a synthetic aperture or form a sensor network [8]. Heterogeneous robot teams are proposed for the exploration of canyon-like structures where communication is challenging [9], [10]. In this paper, we propose the use of a neuromorphic camera as the primary sensor to perform relative state estimation. Our approach utilizes the event streams from the camera to detect the quadrotor, localize it, and estimate the frequency of its propellers. The frequency of the propeller is used by the state estimation pipeline to get first-order kinematics of the quadrotor. We also make use of the shape of the propeller disk detected in the event streams to estimate the orientation of the quadrotor using Perspective-1-Ellipse (P1E) [11]. II. RELATED WORK 

A. Frequency Detection of Periodic Phenomena 

The high dynamic range, low latency and microsecond resolution make event cameras suitable for studying periodic events. They provide a non-invasive way to perform measure-ments. A kernel-based approach was proposed to estimate angular speeds by manually selecting regions in the event data of a rotating object [12]. To estimate frequency of any mechanical periodic phenomena like rotation, flicker, vibra-tion etc. [13] proposed generation of correlation peaks with automatic template selection. In [14] a combined heatmap and clustering based approach is proposed for propeller detection and subsequently frequency estimation using Iterative Closest Point (ICP) registration. [15] proposed the use of digital infinite impulse response filter for brightness reconstruction and created a per-pixel frequency map by detecting zero-level crossing. A method for creating frequency maps is proposed by applying the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to the event stream of each pixel [16]. These approaches assume a completely periodic motion without any drift or ego motion, thus limiting their application in formation flight. 

B. State Estimation using Event Camera 

The estimation of state of UAV is of large interest in swarm robotics. Using an RGB camera for estimation of the relative pose of the camera is a common approach. However, a similar approach cannot be applied to the event camera. The potential use of propeller sensing to estimate rotational attitude parameters was proposed in [17]. In this approach, the event streams are treated as the Poisson process to distinguish events generated by a propeller and the background. The pose is estimated by fitting an ellipse over the aggregated propeller events. HelixTrack extends this work by estimating the pose of the roating propeller using a batched Gauss-Newton opti-mization. They test their algorithm on propeller dataset with different levels of ego-motion [18]. Eventpro [19] proposes the estimation of the propeller frequency using hierarchical event processing and known propeller geometry. The flight commands are then predicted using a trained Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier. In [20], an estimation of ego-motion of kinematic states based on monocular event vision is proposed, relying on event-based optical flow without pro-peller detection. Unlike these methods, our approach directly links quadrotors propeller frequencies to a physical dynamics model for state estimation. III. STATE ESTIMATION USING PROPELLER SENSING 

A. Event Camera Data Representation 

An event camera responds to any change in brightness in the sensor region. They are low-powered device with high dynamic range and microsecond resolution. In contrast to frame-based cameras, they output asynchronous event streams where each event is represented as a tuple 

ei = ( xi, y i, t i, p i), (1) where (xi, y i) denote the pixel coordinates, ti is the microsecond-precision timestamp, and pi ∈ {− 1, +1 } indi-cates the polarity (brightness increase or decrease). An event is triggered when the logarithmic intensity change at a pixel exceeds a threshold C:

|log I(x, y, t i) − log I(x, y, t i−1)| > C. (2) This enables the event cameras to respond to fast changes. They naturally respond to features like edges and corners by design. However, because of their inherent sensitivity to motion, they capture background noise as well. The event streams can be visualized using intermediate pseudo-frame representations like time-surface, event histogram and event frame etc. A comprehensive survey of event-based vision, the type of data representation, and their processing is provided in [5] . 

B. Propeller Detection Pipeline 

The proposed approach processes event streams in temporal chunks of ∆t = 10 ms . The outdoor data set contains noise generated by the background due to events generated by camera movement. These events are filtered out using spatio-temporal contrast filtering. We implemented two approaches to detect the propeller region. The first uses Connected Com-ponents (CC) labeling on the event frame and the other uses Hierarchical Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (HDBSCAN) clustering [21] on the event streams. The goal of both detection approaches is to identify the regions of interest for estimating frequency. Detected regions are tracked across frames and assigned stable tracking IDs based on spatial position. 

1) Connected Components Detection: The CC detector spatially accumulates events within each chunk to form a binary event density map. This frame undergoes a morpho-logical erosion to separate merged blob regions to avoid false detection. The CC analysis [22] extracts blob properties. The regions with area below a threshold are rejected as non-propeller region. This approach was found to be computation-ally efficient but sensitive to parameter tuning. Inputs                   

> RPM Processing
> P1E Processing
> Camera →World
> Orientation Estimation
> Position Estimation
> Output Estimate
> RPM 1– RPM 4
> P1E ellipse
> best-prop event mask
> Propeller detection
> centre + mask separation
> Total thrust T
> sum of squared motor speeds
> Roll differential ∆roll
> right–left motor imbalance
> Ellipse backproj.
> disc normal ˆbraw
> z
> via conic →quadric decomp.
> Depth Zfrom prop span
> known size d+ focal length f
> Pinhole back-proj.
> pixel →3-D point pc
> Cam →FCU →World
> pWvia extrinsics + observer pose
> Orientation KF

ˆbz ∈ R3 (3 states)              

> Predict Update
> Rotate ˆbzby Ellipse-derived RPM angular velocity ωxdisc normal ˆbraw
> z
> Re-normalise to Kalman correction
> ∥ˆbz∥= 1 of ˆbz
> Position KF

x = [ p, v]⊤ ∈ R6 (6 states)                      

> Predict Update
> Tilt-corrected thrust World-frame position
> a=Tmˆbz+gz=pWfrom camera Constant-acceleration Kalman correction of double integrator ˆpand ˆv
> Tˆbz(thrust dir.)
> Roll ˆϕ,Pitch ˆθ
> Position ˆp
> Velocity ˆv

Fig. 2. State estimation pipeline. Two coupled KFs operate on complementary measurements. Orientation KF tracks the body z-axis ˆbz , predicted by RPM-derived angular velocity and corrected by P1E ellipse backprojection. Position KF tracks position and velocity, predicted by tilt-corrected thrust and corrected by camera-derived world-frame position. The orientation estimate provides the thrust direction for the position prediction step. Roll and pitch are extracted from ˆbz via a yaw-free decomposition since yaw is unobservable from the propeller ellipse. 

2) HDBSCAN Clustering Detection: The density based clustering approach treats each event as a two-dimensional point and identifies dense spatial clusters without assuming circular geometry. Due to its ability to work directly on the event streams, an intermediate frame-like representation is not required. For computational efficiency, we subsample the number of events. To detect the propellers, parameters such as size, the minimum number of clusters, minimum number of samples are tuned. For each extracted cluster, we fit an ellipse via principal component analysis of the spatial covariance matrix. The cluster centroid is μj and the 2 × 2 covariance matrix is: 

Σj = 1

nj − 1

> nj

X

> i=1

(ri − μj )( ri − μj )T , (3) where, nj is the number of events in jth cluster. The position of each event within a cluster is given by ri The eigen-decomposition of the covariance matrix yields two eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors, which are used to determine the semi-axes of the fitted ellipse. The detected clusters are rejected if the major axis and the number of events are below a certain threshold. The advantage of density-based clustering is its adaptability when propellers have non-circular appearances, specially when seen from oblique viewing angles. Compared to component labeling, this approach is computationally ex-pensive. 

C. Tracking of the quadrotor 

The detected propeller regions were tracked across tempo-ral chunks using Norfair [23], an open-source multi-object tracking framework. This tracker maintains track continuity by associating detections between frames using Euclidean distance in position space. These detections can come from either CC labeling or density based clustering. Each detection is represented by its centroid (cx, c y ), which serves as both the tracked point and the re-identification embedding for similarity matching. The four centroids can be used to derive the center of the quadrotor and track its position across time. A general survey of event-based quadrotor detection methods is given in [24]. In this work, the objective of propeller detection and tracking is also to validate the accuracy of frequency estimation by matching the tracked propeller ID with the ground truth. The tracker employs a distance threshold and maintains tracks for a few frames during temporary occlusions or detection failures. When a propeller is briefly missed (e.g., when detection fails due to CC labeling merging the blobs or occlusion of the propellers), the tracker predicts its position based on motion history, preventing track fragmentation. This temporal consistency is crucial for maintaining continuous frequency estimates throughout the flight sequence. 

D. Propeller Frequency Estimation 

The frequency is computed by observing the event counts in the region of interest defined by a sub-quadrant in the bounding box around detected propeller. In these regions, Fig. 3. The event frame showing instantaneous RPM and center of quadrotor. The propellers are numbered 1–4 from top-right. 

we temporally bin the events and create a sliding window consisting of time bins sufficient to capture multiple blade passages, resulting in an event-count signal. The FFT is applied to the binned event count signal to detect the dominant frequency peak corresponding to the blade passage rate. A KF smooths the raw estimates. The filter is initialized from the first FFT measurement to avoid convergence delays. The filter provides temporal consistency by rejecting outliers, smoothing out measurement noise. 

E. Relative State Estimation 

The kinematics and dynamics model of the quadrotor is formulated as Eq. (4)–Eq. (7). The equations describing thrust 

T is generated along the body z-axis proportional to the square of the motor angular velocity Ωi. The rotation matrix corresponding to the quaternion q is denoted by R(q). It converts vectors in the body-fixed frame of the quadrotor to the world frame. The total thrust of the target quadrotor is obtained as T = cf

P4 

> i=1

Ω2 

> i

, with Ωi (rad s −1) denoting the angular velocity of motor i obtained from the event-camera propeller frequency estimates and cf denoting thrust coefficient of the motor. The position and velocity are denoted by p and v

respectively. A detailed modeling of dynamics and control of a quadrotor system is described in [25]. 

˙p = v, (4) 

˙v = R(q)



00

T /m 

 + g, (5) 

˙q = 12 q ⊗ [0 , ω], (6) 

˙ω = −β ω, (7) the relative state estimation pipeline has position and orien-tation estimation modules as shown in Fig. 2. The position estimation module has a vector x = [p⊤, v⊤]⊤ ∈ R6.The horizontal components do not receive thrust input and are propagated by constant-velocity extrapolation, making the contribution of propeller frequency directly observable in vertical tracking performance. The state is tracked with a standard linear KF. The orientation is estimated by the tracking z-axis ˆbz =[0 , 0, 1] ⊤ ∈ R3 representing thrust direction in the world frame. The propeller frequency estimates are fused with camera-derived quadrotor position measurements in the world in this filter. The filters are coupled such that orientation estimate provides the thrust direction used by the position estimation module. The total thrust as a function of the motor constant and the propeller frequencies gives the world frame input acceleration. We describe both the modules below. 

1) Position Estimation: The world-frame acceleration is computed using ˆbz from the orientation filter. This provides a transformation to obtain the acceleration in the world frame as 

a = Tm ˆbz + g, (8) where m is the mass of the quadrotor and gravity is denoted by g = [0 , 0, −9.81] ⊤ m s −2. When the orientation estimate is not yet available, the filter defaults to the hover assumption 

ˆbz = [0 , 0, 1] ⊤, so that thrust contributes only to the vertical component. The state transition matrix F and input u gives the prediction model as (10) and (11) 

F =

I I∆t

0 I



, u =

 12 a∆t2

a∆t



, (9) 

ˆxk+1 |k = Fˆxk|k + u, (10) 

Pk+1 |k = FP k|kF⊤ + Q∆t, (11) where P is the state error covariance matrix and Q is the process noise covariance. The world-frame position measurement zk is derived from event-frame detections. A known physical diagonal length be-tween the propellers and the pixel length between the detected propellers is used to estimate depth using the stereo disparity and camera intrinsics. The depth obtained is used to convert the coordinate of the quadrotor center to the world frame. The downward-facing event camera is mounted on the observer quadrotor at a known position and orientation. The quadrotor center in the camera frame is transformed to the observer frame using the rigid transformation. Using the known pose of the observer, this quadrotor center is transformed from the observer frame to the world frame. The position KF observation matrix and gain is 

H = [ I3 03], (12) 

K = PH ⊤(HPH ⊤ + R)−1, (13) the monocular depth estimation using the event frame has inherent uncertainty. To address that, we use measurement noise covariance R = diag( σ2lat , σ 2lat , σ 2depth ), with separate lateral and depth noise terms. 2) Orientation Estimation: The orientation prediction makes use of differential propeller frequencies which produces a roll angular velocity in the body frame [25] as 

ωbody  

> x

= kroll 

 X

> i∈right

Ω2 

> i

− X

> i∈left

Ω2

> i

 (14) The body-frame angular velocity ωbody is rotated into the world frame using the current ˆbz and used to propagate the unit vector using a constant angular velocity model 

ˆbz,k +1 |k = ˆbz,k + ( ωw × ˆbz,k ) ∆ t, ˆbz = ˆbz

∥ˆbz ∥ (15) with covariance update given as follows 

Pori = Pori + Qori ∆t. (16) The event stream of a propeller disk forms an ellipse on the image plane of the event frame. We find the best fit ellipse [26] on the propeller with highest number of events. The ellipse encodes orientation information [11], [27]. We estimate the normal of the propeller by reverse projection of the best-fit ellipse through the intrinsics of the camera and the P1E formulation [11]. This formulation yields a measurement of the body z-axis ˆbz in the world frame. The standard Kalman update is applied with H = I3. The measurement noise covariance Rori = σ2 

> m

I3 reflects uncertainty in ellipse backprojection. Roll and pitch are extracted from the filtered ˆbz via a yaw-free decomposition: 

ϕ = arcsin( −ˆbz,y ), θ = arctan 2( ˆbz,x , ˆbz,z ), (17) the yaw component is not observable from the propeller ellipse. When the disk rotates about its normal, it produces an identical projection, so yaw cannot be recovered from the ellipse geometry alone [11]. Thus, we restrict the orientation estimation to roll and pitch. IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

The experiments were conducted outdoors using two quadrotors in a leader-follower formation. The follower acted as an observer with a downward-facing event camera. It carried the Prophesee IMX636 event sensor, such that the target’s spinning propellers were in the camera’s field of view during flight. The leader was designated as the target. A total of six flight sequences were recorded in the outdoor environment. The observer moved at nearly fixed altitude while the target performed a variety of maneuvers beneath it while varying the vertical separation between the two vehicles. In some trials, the target performs aggressive lateral motions. In all the flight sequences, the four propellers of target are visible, except a few instances where it went out the frame. The performance of the propeller detection and the range of distances in the test sequences is shown in Fig. 4 Telemetry was performed using Real-Time Kinematic Global Navigation Satellite System (RTK-GNSS) and Inertial  

> (a) Observer-Target Distance Range per Test Sequence
> (b) Detection Recall vs Observer-Target Distance Fig. 4. The propeller detection results on the test dataset a) The figure shows range of distance between the target and the observer quadrotor in each sequence, b) shows detection recall vs the distance.

Measurement Unit (IMU) to record the position and orienta-tion of the two quadrotors. In addition to states, the propeller RPM ground truth was obtained using an external sensor and logged synchronously with the event stream. For the purpose of development and parameter tuning, we used one of the sequences as validation data. This validation sequence had the target’s four propellers operated between 143 Hz and 197 Hz 

with a mean of approximately 166 Hz , RPM across all motors. The trajectory of the target and the observer in the world frame is shown in Fig. 5. 

B. Aggregate RPM Results 

For each propeller, we computed Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), and Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE). This was performed for the five flight sequences in the test data using both the propeller detection approaches, the density based clustering method and connect component labeling. Table I summarizes the overall performance in all propellers and datasets.              

> TABLE I PROPELLER FREQUENCY ESTIMATION PERFORMANCE
> Method MAE RMSE MAPE Corr.
> CC 136.2 ±63.0 360.9 ±55.0 2.75% 0.442 HDBSCAN 135.3 ±63.3 360.6 ±54.5 2.73% 0.445 Fig. 5. Target-observer 3-D trajectories in a single validation flight sequence

We found that estimating the RPM using both the de-tection methods achieved nearly identical accuracy. This is indicative since detection only plays a role in identifying the region of interest for frequency computation. Thus, the choice of the propeller detection method has negligible effect on RPM estimation accuracy. The connected component labeling method was used in the state estimation pipeline, since it was faster than the density based clustering approach. The detected propeller regions on an event frame and their respective tracking IDs are shown in Fig. 3. 

C. Error Analysis 

We performed an analysis with the absolute error dis-tributions per-propeller aggregated across all five test flight sequences for both the detection methods. The results were nearly identical for both methods exhibiting similar distribu-tion shapes, suggesting the propeller detection method did not influence RPM estimation. The error histograms for connected component based detection is shown in Fig. 6. The histogram aggregates all individual sample-level errors with a density estimation overlay, and the vertical lines indicate mean and median error. The error for Prop 2 shows the widest spread due to an outlier dataset. The temporal evolution of mean absolute error with ±1σ

bands (first 30 seconds) is shown in Fig. 6. We define the windowed error for propeller p in time bin Wk = [ k, k + 1) :

¯ep(k) = 1

|Wk|

X

> t∈Wk

|Ωest ,p (t) − Ωgt ,p (t)|. (18) The error bands are computed across the datasets in each time bin. It was found that both detection methods exhibit a stable error throughout the sequence with no significant transients. 

D. Per-Propeller Analysis 

The redundant events of the background can cause signifi-cant noise despite the use of a spatio-temporal clustering filter. The MAE per motor and the correlation for both methods are in Table II. Prop 1 achieves the lowest MAE, while Prop 2 exhibits the highest. This variation is due to partial occlusions during specific flight maneuvers. Prop 4 achieves the highest correlation for both methods.                       

> TABLE II PER -P ROPELLER MAE (RPM) AND CORRELATION
> Prop 1 Prop 2 Prop 3 Prop 4
> CC MAE 117.6 171.7 127.2 128.2 HDBSCAN MAE 117.1 172.3 122.8 129.1 CC Corr. 0.372 0.281 0.461 0.655 HDBSCAN Corr. 0.373 0.281 0.471 0.655

E. State Estimation Results 

To analyze the state estimation pipeline, we computed all the components of position and velocity. The orientation of the body z-axis was decomposed in roll and pitch angles. The comparison is reported in Table III across the five flight sequences. The ground-truth states were obtained using RTK-GNSS and IMU. Since the RPM KF is initialized from the first measurement to avoid bias from a fixed prior, the first 

300 ms of each sequence is excluded from evaluation to allow the sliding-window buffer to fill. The z-axis dominates position error due to noise from the monocular depth estimation, while the lateral axes benefit from direct camera measurements. Since the diagonal pixel length between the propellers is estimated using a noisy blob centroid, there is a systematic depth uncertainty. The estimation pipeline infers the velocity via the position-velocity cross-covariance, yielding mean RMSE below 0.5 m s −1 on all axes In the five test flight sequences, the quadrotor exhibits lateral motion more than forward-backward motion. Thus, the roll range is larger than the pitch. Though the mean RMSE for both roll and pitch are comparable, The orientation KF estimates the roll stronger than the pitch taking advantage of left-right differential in propeller frequencies. The yaw is not estimated since it is not observable from ellipse fitting. The sequence 104119, in Table III, exhibits the highest errors in both position and orientation, attributable to aggressive lateral maneuvers during that flight. The temporal evolution of the estimation error for all the element of state vector is shown in Fig. 7. 

F. Discussion 

We made a few observations from the multi-dataset evalu-ation. The propeller detection method has a negligible effect on the accuracy of the RPM. CC labeling and HDBSCAN clustering achieve nearly identical overall accuracy. The per-propeller error analysis suggests that the RPM estimation pipeline dominates accuracy, not the spatial detection method, since the propeller region is used only to identify the region (a) RPM error distribution (b) Error over time Fig. 6. The RPM error analysis for the connected component labeling based propeller detection. a) The figure shows per-propeller absolute error distributions across the five test flight sequences, b) shows propeller frequency estimation error over time. The error was nearly identical for the HDBSCAN based method. TABLE III STATE ESTIMATION RMSE ACROSS FIVE TEST SEQUENCES .                                                                

> Position Velocity Orientation
> Sequence x(m)y(m)z(m)x(m s −1)y(m s −1)z(m s −1)roll ( ◦)pitch ( ◦)103545 0.363 0.138 0.919 0.675 0.187 0.590 5.12 9.12 103946 0.059 0.097 1.092 0.086 0.134 0.258 5.78 7.47 104119 0.945 0.253 1.147 0.916 0.228 0.697 6.13 13.45 104755 0.044 0.027 0.798 0.096 0.075 0.312 3.16 6.98 110256 0.070 0.102 0.526 0.237 0.330 0.428 8.43 8.85 Mean ±Std 0.30 ±0.35 0.12 ±0.07 0.90 ±0.22 0.40 ±0.34 0.19 ±0.09 0.46 ±0.17 5.72 ±1.70 9.18 ±2.29

of interest. CC processes on average faster per sequence than HDBSCAN. Therefore, the connected component method is preferred for real-time or resource-constrained applications. The variance of the per-propeller RPM error indicates that propeller-specific factors such as viewing angle, blade geome-try, and occlusion affect the quality of the estimation more than the detection algorithm. The accuracy of the RPM depends on the quality of the event signal from the propeller region. The detection method may merge adjacent blobs, or miss them when the propellers are outside the frame, specifically during fast lateral motion. From RPM-driven state estimation we found that the z-axis dominates the position error due to the monocular depth uncertainty, while lateral axes benefit from direct camera mea-surements. The orientation KF recovers roll more accurately than pitch, reflecting the stronger observability of the left–right motor differential compared to the front–rear differential, due to a left-right velocity bias of the target in the test dataset. The estimated body z-axis from the orientation filter determines the thrust direction used in the position prediction step, enabling tilt-corrected acceleration estimates. V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK This paper demonstrates an event–based approach to relative state estimation for quadrotors. Propeller frequencies are ex-tracted from the periodic event signal in each propeller’s region of interest and used to enhance the orientation estimation of observed UAV. A system of coupled KFs, one for position and the other for orientation, fuse RPM-derived thrust and angular velocity with camera-derived position and tilt mea-surements. The position KF estimates position and velocity of the quadrotor, while the orientation KF recovers roll and pitch. The propeller frequencies provide a direct vertical acceleration signal complementary to the camera-derived position, and the differential motor RPMs enable attitude estimation through the propeller disc geometry. This proposed relative state estimation method is evaluated across five outdoor flight sequences. Future work will explore multi-quadrotor scenarios and further leverage the use of event vision to extract features based on periodic events and geometric primitives to estimate relative states. APPENDIX 

A. RPM Estimation Pipeline 

Fig. 8 shows estimated RPM versus the ground truth for a representative validation sequence (105115) using CC de-tection. The estimated RPM closely tracks the ground truth across all four propellers, with deviations primarily occurring during rapid RPM transients. Figure 9 shows the processing stages for propeller frequency extraction from event camera data. REFERENCES [1] S.-J. Chung, A. A. Paranjape, P. Dames, S. Shen, and V. Kumar, “A survey on aerial swarm robotics,” IEEE Transactions on robotics ,vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 837–855, 2018. Fig. 7. Estimation error (mean ±1σ across five sequences) over time. Top row: position error ( m). Middle row: velocity error ( m s −1). Bottom row: orientation error ( ◦). The shaded band represents ±1 standard deviation across sequences. [2] V. Walter, N. Staub, A. Franchi, and M. Saska, “Uvdar system for visual relative localization with application to leader–follower formations of multirotor uavs,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 2637–2644, 2019. [3] J. Ulrich, J. Blaha, A. Alsayed, T. Rouˇ cek, F. Arvin, and T. Krajn´ ık, “Real time fiducial marker localisation system with full 6 dof pose estimation,” ACM SIGAPP Applied Computing Review , vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 20–35, 2023. [4] M. Faessler, E. Mueggler, K. Schwabe, and D. Scaramuzza, “A monoc-ular pose estimation system based on infrared LEDs,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , 2014, pp. 907–913. [5] G. Gallego, T. Delbr¨ uck, G. Orchard, C. Bartolozzi, B. Taba, A. Censi, S. Leutenegger, A. J. Davison, J. Conradt, K. Daniilidis et al. , “Event-based vision: A survey,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 154–180, 2020. [6] A. R. Vidal, H. Rebecq, T. Horstschaefer, and D. Scaramuzza, “Ultimate slam? combining events, images, and imu for robust visual slam in hdr and high-speed scenarios,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 994–1001, 2018. [7] N. J. Sanket, C. D. Singh, C. M. Parameshwara, C. Ferm¨ uller, G. C. De Croon, and Y. Aloimonos, “Evpropnet: Detecting drones by finding propellers for mid-air landing and following,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15045 , 2021. [8] M. Saska, “Large sensors with adaptive shape realised by self-stabilised compact groups of micro aerial vehicles,” in Robotics Research: The 18th International Symposium ISRR . Springer, 2019, pp. 101–107. [9] J. Stadler, H. Kayal, A. Maurer, J. Mutter, and C. Riegler, “Exploring transient phenomena in the martian atmosphere,” in 76th International Astronautical Congress (IAC) , 2025. [10] C. Riegler, H. Kayal, A. Maurer, J. Mutter, and J. Stadler, “Towards autorotation landers for communication and sensor networks on mars,” in 76th International Astronautical Congress (IAC) , 2025. [11] V. Gaudilli` ere, G. Simon, and M.-O. Berger, “Perspective-1-ellipsoid: formulation, analysis and solutions of the camera pose estimation prob-lem from one ellipse-ellipsoid correspondence,” International Journal of Computer Vision , vol. 131, no. 9, pp. 2446–2470, 2023. [12] G. O. d. A. Azevedo, L. H. d. S. Silva, A. Freire, R. P. de Ara´ ujo, and B. J. Fernandes, “Multiple simultaneous rotation event-based angular speed measurement,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 8869– 8882, 2025. [13] J. Kol´ aˇ r, R. ˇSpetl´ ık, and J. Matas, “Eeppr: event-based estimation of periodic phenomena rate using correlation in 3d,” in Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Vision (ICMV 2024) , vol. 13517. SPIE, 2025, pp. 223–230. [14] G. Zhao, Y. Shen, N. Chen, P. Hu, L. Liu, and H. Wen, “Ev-tach: A handheld rotational speed estimation system with event camera,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 7483–7498, 2023. [15] B. Pfrommer, “Frequency cam: Imaging periodic signals in real-time,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00198 , 2022. [16] M. Aitsam, G. Goyal, C. Bartolozzi, and A. Di Nuovo, “Vibration vision: Real-time machinery fault diagnosis with event cameras,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2024, pp. 293–306. (a) Propeller 1 (b) Propeller 2 

(c) Propeller 3 (d) Propeller 4 Fig. 8. RPM estimation (red) vs ground truth (blue) for the validation sequence using connected component labeling based propeller detection. All four propellers are tracked continuously. 

Event Acquisition 

Detection Tracking & RPM Extraction 

Raw event stream 

STC noise filter 

Event frame accumulation 

(x, y, t, p )

Connected-component detection 

Prop blob centres 

(ui, v i)

Quadrant-based tracker (Prop IDs 1–4) 

Per-prop binning FFT (Hanning) Peak + parabolic interpolation RPM Kalman filter 

RPM 1, RPM 2, RPM 3, RPM 4

smoothed per-propeller RPM 

Fig. 9. The propeller RPM estimation pipeline. Raw events from the event camera are filtered, accumulated into frames, and processed through connected component detection to locate spinning propeller blobs. A tracker assigns stable Prop IDs, after which per-propeller FFT extracts the blade-passage frequency. [17] R. Spetlik, T. Uhrova, and J. Matas, “Efficient real-time quadcopter propeller detection and attribute estimation with high-resolution event camera,” in Image Analysis , 2025. [18] R. Spetlik, M. Pliska, V. Vrba, and J. Matas, “Helixtrack: Event-based tracking and rpm estimation of propeller-like objects,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.09235 [19] X. Chen, J. Xu, W. Ding, H. Wang, X. Luo, R. Duan, J. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Liu, and X. Chen, “Count every rotation and every rotation counts: Exploring drone dynamics via propeller sensing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13100 , 2025. [20] X. Lu, Y. Zhou, J. Mai, K. Dai, Y. Xu, and S. Shen, “Event-based visual-inertial state estimation for high-speed maneuvers,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2025. [21] R. J. Campello, D. Moulavi, and J. Sander, “Density-based clustering based on hierarchical density estimates,” in Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining . Springer, 2013, pp. 160–172. [22] H. Samet and M. Tamminen, “Efficient component labeling of images of arbitrary dimension represented by linear bintrees,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 579– 586, 2002. [23] J. Alori, A. Descoins, javier, F. Lezama, KotaYuhara, D. Fern´ andez, A. Castro, fatih, David, R. C. Linares, F. Kurucz, B. R´ ıos, shafu.eth, K. Nar, D. Huh, and Moises, “tryolabs/norfair: v2.2.0,” Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7504727 [24] G. Magrini, L. Berlincioni, F. Becattini, L. Cultrera, and P. Pala, “Drone detection with event cameras,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2025, pp. 4703–4714. [25] R. Mahony, V. Kumar, and P. Corke, “Multirotor aerial vehicles: Model-ing, estimation, and control of quadrotor,” IEEE robotics & automation magazine , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 20–32, 2012. [26] A. W. Fitzgibbon, M. Pilu, and R. B. Fisher, “Direct least squares fitting of ellipses,” in Proceedings of 13th international conference on pattern recognition , vol. 1. IEEE, 1996, pp. 253–257. [27] D. Lo´ pez de Ipin a, P. R. Mendonc ¸a, A. Hopper, and A. Hopper, “Trip: A low-cost vision-based location system for ubiquitous computing,” 

Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 206–219, 2002.