Title: Stable Walking for Bipedal Locomotion under Foot-Slip via Virtual Nonholonomic Constraints

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29050v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:15:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Stable Walking for Bipedal Locomotion under Foot-Slip via Virtual Nonholonomic Constraints 

Leonardo Colombo 1, Álvaro Rodríguez Abella 2, Alexandre Anahory Simoes 3, Anthony Bloch 4.

Abstract — Foot slip is a major source of instability in bipedal locomotion on low-friction or uncertain terrain. Standard con-trol approaches typically assume no-slip contact and therefore degrade when slip occurs. We propose a control framework that explicitly incorporates slip into the locomotion model through virtual nonholonomic constraints, which regulate the tangential stance-foot velocity while remaining compatible with the virtual holonomic constraints used to generate the walking gait. The resulting closed-loop system is formulated as a hybrid dynamical system with continuous swing dynamics and discrete impact events. A nonlinear feedback law enforces both classes of constraints and yields a slip-compatible hybrid zero dynamics manifold for the reduced-order locomotion dynamics. Stability of periodic walking gaits is characterized through the associated Poincaré map, and numerical results illustrate stabilization under slip conditions. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Robust locomotion on uncertain terrain remains a central challenge in legged robotics [1], [2], [3]. In particular, foot slip is a frequent source of performance degradation and loss of stability when walking on low-friction or poorly characterized surfaces [4], [5]. Most control strategies for bipedal locomotion assume ideal no-slip contact conditions, as in the standard hybrid locomotion framework of [6], which simplifies the modeling and control design but leads to poor performance when tangential contact forces exceed the friction limits. As a result, slip is typically treated as a disturbance to be rejected rather than as a phenomenon that can be explicitly modeled and controlled [4]. A large body of work has addressed gait stabilization using hybrid dynamical system models that combine continuous swing dynamics with discrete impact events at foot touch-down [6], [7]. In this framework, periodic walking gaits are typically stabilized through the design of virtual constraints and the analysis of hybrid zero dynamics. These techniques have been successfully applied to a wide range of robotic               

> 1(leonardo.colombo@car.upm-csic.es) is with Centre for Automation and Robotics (CSIC-UPM), Ctra. M300 Campo Real, Km 0,200, Arganda del Rey - 28500 Madrid, Spain.
> 2(arabella@comillas.edu) is with the Department of Applied Mathemat-ics, Comillas Pontifical University, Madrid, 28015 - Madrid, Spain.
> 3(alexandre.anahory@ie.edu) School of Science and Technology, IE University, Madrid, Spain.
> 4(abloch@umich.edu) is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. The authors acknowledge financial support from Grants PID2022-137909NB-C21 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, and from NSF grant DMS-2103026 and AFOSR grants FA 9550-22-1-0215 and FA 9550-23-1-0400. A.R.A. acknowledges financial support by grant PID2024-156578NB-I00 funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/FEDER, EU. L. C. was supported in part by iRoboCity2030-CM, Robótica Inteligente para Ciudades Sostenibles (TEC-2024/TEC-62), funded by the Programas de Actividades I+D en Tecnologías en la Comunidad de Madrid.

platforms and have led to strong theoretical guarantees such as orbital stability of periodic gaits [8]. However, the standard formulation assumes no-slip contact of the stance foot with the ground during the support phase, which restricts the applicability of the framework to high-friction environments. When slip occurs, the stance foot is no longer fixed relative to the ground, and the resulting dynamics deviate from the nominal no-slip model. Rather than enforcing zero tangential velocity at the stance foot, it is natural to consider models in which tangential motion is allowed but regulated. From a geometric perspective, this situation can be interpreted as the introduction of nonholonomic constraints associated with the allowable slip directions of the biped (for the general theory of nonholonomic constraints see e.g., [9]). Motivated by this observation, this paper proposes a control framework that explicitly incorporates slip into the locomotion dynamics through the design of virtual affine nonholonomic constraints [10]. These constraints regulate tangential foot velocity and shape the closed-loop dynamics in a way that remains compatible with the hybrid structure of legged locomotion. Virtual nonholonomic constraints are a class of virtual constraints that depend on the velocities of the system, rather than only on its configuration variables. They were introduced in [11], [12] to design velocity-based swing-foot placement laws in bipedal robots. More recently, their geometric structure and control-theoretic role have been further developed in [13], [14], [15]. In addition, this class of virtual constraints has been used in [16], [17], [18], [19] to encode velocity-dependent stable walking gaits through momenta conjugate to the unactuated degrees of freedom of legged robots and prosthetic legs. Related slip-aware walking models based on hybrid zero dynamics enrich the reduced-order description by incor-porating additional slip variables and slip-dependent gait transitions [20], [21]. The viewpoint adopted here is dif-ferent: instead of treating tangential foot motion only as an additional reduced-order effect, we regulate it directly at the level of the closed-loop kinematics through a virtual nonholonomic constraint designed to remain compatible with the nominal holonomic gait structure. In this way, admissible tangential motion is incorporated into the hybrid gait design through an explicit velocity-level mechanism. The main contribution of this work is a nonlinear con-trol design for walking with slip. We formulate a hybrid locomotion model in which admissible tangential contact motion is incorporated through a virtual affine nonholonomic constraint compatible with a nominal set of virtual holonomic 

> arXiv:2603.29050v1 [eess.SY] 30 Mar 2026

constraints. We then derive a nonlinear feedback law that si-multaneously enforces both classes of constraints and yields a slip-compatible hybrid zero dynamics manifold. Finally, we characterize local orbital stability of the resulting periodic gait through the associated Poincaré return map and validate the approach numerically under variable slip conditions. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the locomotion model with foot-slip and reviews virtual holonomic constraints and the design of stable walking gaits used in locomotion. Section III presents the design of the virtual nonholonomic constraints and de-velops the control design and stability analysis. Section IV illustrates the approach through numerical simulations. II. H YBRID LOCOMOTION FRAMEWORK 

A. Hybrid locomotion model for walking with foot slip 

Bipedal walking is naturally modeled as a hybrid dynam-ical system consisting of continuous swing dynamics and discrete impact events. Let us briefly recall the fundamental facts of this model that will be useful in the forthcoming sections. For a full description of the bipedal walker, we refer for instance to [6]. Let Q ⊂ Rn denote the configuration space of the free-floating model of the biped, with local coordinates q ∈ Q.The state space is thus the tangent bundle T Q , whose ele-ments are denoted by x = ( q, ˙q) and represent positions and generalized velocities. The continuous-time dynamics during the single-support phase is given by the Euler–Lagrange equations 

D(q)¨ q + C(q, ˙q) ˙ q + G(q) = B(q)u + Jc(q)⊤λ, (1) where D(q) ∈ Rn×n is the inertia matrix, C(q, ˙q) ∈ Rn×n is the Coriolis matrix, including Coriolis and centrifugal terms, and G(q) ∈ Rn models gravitational forces. The control input u ∈ Rm consists of the joint torques applied by the actuators, with B(q) ∈ Rn×m denoting the actuation matrix that maps the control inputs to generalized forces. Finally, 

Jc(q) ∈ R2×n denotes the Jacobian of the stance-foot contact constraint, and λ = ( λt, λ n) ∈ R2 contains the tangential and normal ground reaction forces. Let pf (q) ∈ R2 denote the Cartesian position of the stance foot, with velocity vf (q, ˙q) = ˙pf (q, ˙q) = Jf (q) ˙ q,where Jf (q) = ∂p f 

> ∂q

(q) ∈ R2×n is the Jacobian of the stance-foot contact point. In the present setting, this Jacobian coincides with the contact Jacobian introduced above, i.e., 

Jf (q) = Jc(q). In the standard rigid-contact model for bipedal locomotion (see, for instance, [6, Eq. (3.19)]), the stance foot is assumed to be fixed relative to the ground, that is, vf (q, ˙q) = 0 . This no-slip assumption is valid only when the tangential contact force remains within the admissible friction cone, namely, |λt| ≤ μλ n, where μ > 0 is the static friction coefficient. When this friction bound is violated, the no-slip constraint breaks down and the stance foot may slide along the contact surface. To account for slip, we relax the no-slip condition by allowing tangential motion at the contact while preserving normal contact. Accordingly, the stance-foot velocity is de-composed as vf = vn + vt, where vn and vt are the normal and tangential components, respectively. During the stance phase we impose the contact condition, vn = 0 , but allow for the tangential component to be non-zero, vt̸ = 0 . Thereby, tangential slip is explicitly incorporated into the locomotion model. When the swing foot strikes the ground, the hybrid system undergoes a discrete transition. The switching surface is denoted by S = {(q, ˙q) ∈ T Q | hsw (q) = 0 , ˙hsw (q, ˙q) < 0}.Note that if psw (q) = ( psw ,x (q), p sw ,y (q)) ∈ R2 denotes the Cartesian position of the swing foot, then hsw (q) = psw ,y (q)

is its height relative to the ground. Thus, S characterizes touchdown configurations for which the swing foot reaches the ground with negative normal velocity. At impact, we assume a perfectly inelastic collision, so that the configu-ration remains continuous while the velocity undergoes an instantaneous jump. The corresponding reset map is denoted by ∆ : S → T Q, ∆( q, ˙q−) = (q, ˙q+), where ˙q− and 

˙q+ denote the pre- and post-impact velocities, respectively. The post-impact velocity is determined by the impulse– momentum relation 

D(q)( ˙ q+ − ˙q−) = Ji(q)⊤Λ, (2) where Ji(q) ∈ R2×n denotes the Jacobian of the impact contact constraint at touchdown and Λ ∈ R2 is the impulsive contact force. Combining the continuous swing dynamics and the impact map, and denoting x = ( q, ˙q) ∈ T Q , we obtain a hybrid system of the form 

˙x = f (x) + g(x)u, x / ∈ S, (3) 

x+ = ∆( x−), x− ∈ S, (4) where f and g are induced by (1). We refer to (3)–(4) as the hybrid locomotion system. System (3)–(4) has the standard hybrid structure used in bipedal locomotion, but differs from the classical nonslip form in that the continuous dynamics is written in free-floating coordinates and explicitly retains the contact forces, thereby allowing tangential slip during the stance phase. 

B. Virtual holonomic constraints and hybrid zero dynamics 

A common approach to stabilizing periodic walking gaits is based on the design of virtual holonomic constraints (VHCs), which coordinate the evolution of the robot joints through feedback control [6], [7]. A VHC is defined by an output function y : Q → Rk that specifies desired relations among the configuration variables. In locomotion, these relations are typically parameterized through a phasing variable along the gait. Accordingly, suppose that a desired gait is encoded through the output 

y : Q → Rk, y = h − hd ◦ θ, (5) where h : Q → Rk provides the variables to be controlled and hd ◦ θ : Q → Rk gives the desired evolution of such variables, which is parameterized by a phase variable θ :Q → R that is assumed to be strictly monotonic along the gait. In the standard VHC setting, one typically chooses the number of outputs to match the number of actuated inputs. In the present slip-aware setting, however, one scalar control direction is reserved for slip regulation, so that the holonomic output dimension is chosen as k = m − 1.The virtual constraint is enforced by driving the output to zero, which defines the zero dynamics manifold 

Z = {(q, ˙q) ∈ T Q | y(q) = 0 , ˙y(q, ˙q) = 0 }. (6) Since the output depends only on the configuration, its first time derivative is ˙y(q, ˙q) = ∂y ∂q (q) ˙ q. Therefore, Z is defined independently of the feedback law. If the feedback controller renders Z invariant under the continuous dynamics, the closed-loop system restricted to Z

defines the zero dynamics . If Z is also invariant under the impact map, i.e. ∆( Z ∩ S) ⊂ Z , then the dynamics restricted to Z define the hybrid zero dynamics (HZD). The hybrid zero dynamics provide a reduced-order model that captures the gait evolution while satisfying the virtual constraints. Stability of the walking gaits can then be an-alyzed by studying the periodic orbit of the hybrid system restricted to Z; see [22] for details. In the classical nonslip walking model, the stance foot is subject to a physical no-slip contact condition. When foot slip is present, this contact condition can no longer be assumed to hold, and the tangential stance-foot velocity must instead be regulated through feedback. This motivates the introduction of virtual nonholonomic constraints, which encode the desired slip behavior while preserving the hybrid structure of the locomotion dynamics. 

C. Output dynamics, gait parameterization and stability 

The virtual constraints introduced above are enforced through outputs chosen to have relative degree two on the domain of interest. Consider the output function (5) with state x = (q, ˙q) ∈ T Q . Differentiating twice along the dynamics (3) gives ¨y = L2 

> f

y(x) + Lg Lf y(x) u, where Lf

and Lg denote Lie derivatives along the drift and input vector fields, respectively. Assume that the decoupling matrix 

Lg Lf y(x) is nonsingular on the domain of interest. Then the input–output linearizing controller 

u = −(Lg Lf y)−1 L2 

> f

y + KdLf y + Kpy,

with Kp, K d ∈ Rk×k positive definite, yields the closed-loop output dynamics ¨y + Kd ˙y + Kpy = 0 . Consequently, the output converges exponentially to zero, and the zero dynamics manifold (6) is rendered invariant and locally exponentially attractive. The desired gait is typically parameterized using Bézier polynomials. Let hd(θ) = 

> M

X

> i=0

αi

Mi



θi(1 − θ)M −i, where 

θ(q) is a strictly monotonic phasing variable that parameter-izes the progression of the gait along the step, and αi are Bézier coefficients specifying the desired gait profile. The coefficients at the endpoints determine the desired values at the beginning and end of the step, while the remaining coefficients shape the transition. The stability of the resulting periodic walking gait is analyzed through the Poincaré map associated with the hybrid system [23], [24]. Let P denote the Poincaré return map defined on a transversal section of the switching surface 

S. If x∗ is a fixed point of P , i.e., P (x∗) = x∗, then the corresponding orbit represents a periodic walking gait. Orbital stability of the gait is determined by the eigenvalues of the linearized Poincaré map AP = DP (x∗). If all eigenvalues lie strictly inside the unit circle, the periodic gait is locally exponentially stable. III. V IRTUAL NONHOLONOMIC CONSTRAINTS FOR SLIP 

REGULATION AND STABLE WALKING 

Next, we introduce virtual affine nonholonomic constraints that regulate the slip velocity through feedback control and make them compatible with the virtual holonomic constraints used to encode the nominal walking gait. 

A. Virtual affine nonholonomic constraints 

To explicitly account for stance-foot slip, we intro-duce a class of velocity constraints that prescribe admis-sible tangential motion at the contact point. Let pf (q) = (pf,x (q), p f,y (q)) ∈ R2 denote the Cartesian position of the stance foot. In the planar setting considered here, the contact surface is locally modeled as the horizontal ground 

C = {(x, y ) ∈ R2 | y = 0 }, so that its tangent space is spanned by the horizontal direction et = (1 , 0) ⊤. Hence, if 

Jf (q) = ∂p f 

> ∂q

(q) ∈ R2×n, the tangential stance-foot velocity is given by vt(q, ˙q) = e⊤ 

> t

Jf (q) ˙ q.Instead of imposing the no-slip condition vt = 0 , we prescribe an admissible slip law of the form 

vt(q, ˙q) = b(q), (7) where b : Q → R is a smooth map specifying the desired tangential slip profile. Equation (7) can be written as 

A(q) ˙ q = b(q), (8) with A(q) := e⊤ 

> t

Jf (q) ∈ R1×n. This defines, for each q ∈

Q, an affine subspace of admissible velocities, 

D(q) = { ˙q ∈ Tq Q | A(q) ˙ q = b(q) }. (9) 

Definition 1: The affine family of admissible velocities (9) is said to define a virtual affine nonholonomic constraint if there exists a feedback law u = α(q, ˙q) such that the set 

Zslip := {(q, ˙q) ∈ T Q | A(q) ˙ q = b(q)}

is invariant under the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics. In other words, if the initial condition satisfies the affine velocity constraint, then the closed-loop trajectory satisfies it for all future times during the stance phase. In this case, the slip motion is not treated as a disturbance, but rather as a regulated component of the locomotion dynamics. Whereas virtual holonomic constraints coordinate config-uration variables through outputs of relative degree two, the constraints in (8) act directly at the velocity level and encode admissible tangential contact motion during stance. Define the slip output ηs : T Q → R by ηs(q, ˙q) := 

A(q) ˙ q − b(q). Along the continuous-time dynamics (1) its derivative is 

˙ηs = Γ s(q, ˙q, λ ) + Ms(q)u, (10) where 

Γs(q, ˙q, λ ) := A(q)D(q)−1 −C(q, ˙q) ˙ q − G(q) + Jc(q)⊤λ

+ ˙A(q, ˙q) ˙ q − ∂b ∂q (q) ˙ q, (11) 

Ms(q) := A(q)D(q)−1B(q) ∈ R1×m. (12) Here, the stance phase domain denotes the subset of T Q in which the stance foot remains in contact with the ground and no impact event occurs, so that the continuous-time dynamics (1) are valid. 

Proposition 1: Assume that A(·) has constant rank 1 on the stance phase domain, and that Ms(q) in (12) has full row rank 1 for every q in that domain. Then, locally on the stance phase domain, there exists a smooth feedback law rendering the constraint (8) invariant under the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics. 

Proof: Consider the constraint function F : T Q → R,

F (q, ˙q) := A(q) ˙ q−b(q) = ηs(q, ˙q). By assumption, A(q) has constant rank 1; hence F has constant rank 1 with respect to the fiber variable ˙q. Therefore, Zslip = F −1(0) is an embedded submanifold of T Q of codimension 1.Differentiating F along trajectories of (1) yields (10). Since Ms(q) has full row rank, for each q there exists a smooth local right inverse M † 

> s

(q) satisfying Ms(q)M † 

> s

(q) = 1. Fix any scalar gain ks > 0 and define 

u =M † 

> s

(q) −Γs(q, ˙q, λ ) − ksηs(q, ˙q). (13) Substituting (13) into (10) gives 

˙ηs = Γ s + MsM † 

> s

(−Γs − ksηs) = −ksηs.

Hence ηs(·) satisfies the linear homogeneous equation ˙ηs =

−ksηs. If the initial condition lies in Zslip , then ηs(0) = 0 and therefore ηs(t) ≡ 0 for all times for which the solution exists. Thus Zslip is invariant under the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics. 

Remark 1: Since the slip constraint is scalar in the present planar model, the full-row-rank condition on Ms(q) reduces to Ms(q)̸ = 0 . This is the coordinate-level algebraic coun-terpart of the transversality condition between the affine constraint distribution and the input distribution in [10]. ⋄

Remark 2: If Zslip is rendered invariant by feedback, then the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics restrict to a smooth reduced-order dynamics on Zslip . This restricted dynamics describes the evolution of the mechanical system under the admissible slip kinematics encoded by the affine constraint A(q) ˙ q = b(q). ⋄

B. Control Design 

We now construct a feedback law that enforces the virtual affine nonholonomic constraint while simultaneously stabi-lizing the virtual holonomic outputs defining the desired gait. In addition to regulating slip, the controller must enforce the virtual holonomic constraints defining the desired walk-ing gait. Using the relative-degree-two structure described in Section II, the output dynamics can be written as 

¨y = H(q, ˙q, λ ) + Mh(q, ˙q)u, (14) where H(q, ˙q, λ ) := L2 

> f

y(x) and Mh(q, ˙q) := Lg Lf y(x).Stacking (10) and (14), we obtain the mixed relative-degree system 

" ˙ηs

¨y

#

=

"Γs

H

#

+

"Ms

Mh

#| {z }   

> =: A(q, ˙q)

u. (15) Assume that A(q, ˙q) ∈ Rm×m is nonsingular on the stance phase domain, where m = k + 1 is the number of control inputs. Let ks > 0 and let Kp, K d ∈ Rk×k be positive definite gain matrices. Consider the feedback law 

u = A(q, ˙q)−1

" −Γs(q, ˙q, λ ) − ksηs

−H(q, ˙q, λ ) − Kd ˙y − Kpy

#

. (16) Under (16), the closed-loop output dynamics become 

˙ηs + ksηs = 0 , (17) 

¨y + Kd ˙y + Kpy = 0 . (18) Substituting the control law into the system dynamics yields the closed-loop hybrid system 

˙x = fc(x), x / ∈ S, (19) 

x+ = ∆( x−), x ∈ S. (20) Hence, the manifold defined by ηs = 0 , y = 0 , and ˙y = 0 

is invariant under the closed-loop continuous-time dynam-ics, and the corresponding outputs converge exponentially to zero. The impact map governs the discrete transitions between successive steps. 

Proposition 2: Assume that A(q, ˙q) is nonsingular on the stance phase domain, and define 

Zint = Z ∩ Z slip (21) 

=



(q, ˙q) ∈ T Q y(q) = 0 , ∂y ∂q (q) ˙ q = 0 , A (q) ˙ q = b(q)



.

Assume moreover that the impact map satisfies 

∆ Zint ∩ S ⊂ Z int . (22) Then, under the feedback law (16), the manifold Zint is invariant under the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics, and for every x− ∈ Z int ∩ S the corresponding post-impact state satisfies x+ = ∆( x−) ∈ Z int . In particular, Zint defines a hybrid zero dynamics manifold compatible with slip. Proof: Let x = ( q, ˙q) and suppose that x(0) ∈ Z int .By definition of Zint , we have 

y(0) = 0 , ∂y ∂q (q(0)) ˙ q(0) = 0 , A (q(0)) ˙ q(0) − b(q(0)) = 0 .

Equivalently, y(0) = 0 , ˙y(0) = 0 , η s(0) = 0 .Under the feedback law (16), the slip output satisfies the closed-loop equation ˙ηs + ksηs = 0 . Since this is a lin-ear homogeneous differential equation with initial condition 

ηs(0) = 0 , uniqueness of solutions implies that ηs(t) ≡ 0 for all times for which the solution exists. Hence the affine slip constraint is preserved along the continuous-time dynamics. Likewise, the gait output satisfies ¨y + Kd ˙y + Kpy = 0 .Since this is a linear homogeneous second-order system with initial conditions y(0) = 0 and ˙y(0) = 0 , uniqueness of solu-tions implies that y(t) ≡ 0, ˙y(t) ≡ 0 for all times for which the solution exists. Hence the virtual holonomic constraints are preserved along the continuous-time dynamics. Therefore, every trajectory initialized in Zint remains in 

Zint under the closed-loop continuous-time flow. That is, 

Zint is invariant under the flow (19). Now let x− ∈ Z int ∩ S. By (22) the corresponding post-impact state satisfies x+ = ∆( x−) ∈ Zint . Hence Zint 

is preserved by the impact map whenever the trajectory reaches the switching surface. It follows that Zint is invariant under both the continuous-time closed-loop dynamics and the discrete reset map. Therefore, Zint defines a hybrid invariant manifold on which both the virtual holonomic constraints and the slip constraint are enforced. In particular, it defines a hybrid zero dynamics manifold compatible with slip. 

Definition 2: The manifold Zint is called a slip-compatible hybrid zero dynamics manifold .

Remark 3: If the feedback law (16) is well defined and 

Zint is invariant under the continuous-time closed-loop dy-namics, then the vector field fc restricts to a well-defined reduced-order continuous-time dynamics on Zint . Along this restricted dynamics, the virtual holonomic constraints are ex-actly enforced and the tangential stance-foot velocity satisfies the prescribed slip law. Thus, Zint provides a reduced-order stance model that simultaneously captures walking dynamics and regulated slip motion. ⋄

C. Stability of Periodic Walking Gaits 

Let x = ( q, ˙q) denote the state of the closed-loop hybrid system and consider the dynamics (19)–(20). A walking gait corresponds to a periodic orbit of the hybrid system. More precisely, a trajectory x∗(t) represents a periodic gait if there exists T > 0 such that x∗(T +) = x∗(0) .Under the virtual holonomic constraints introduced in Section II and the virtual affine nonholonomic slip constraint developed in this section, the manifold Zint is invariant under the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics. To study stability of a periodic gait, we introduce coordinates measuring devi-ation from Zint . Let η = y ˙y ηs

T denote the transverse coordinates, where y corresponds to the virtual holonomic output and ηs is the slip output, which measures deviation from the prescribed slip law. Then 

Zint = {(q, ˙q) ∈ T Q | y = 0 , ˙y = 0 , η s = 0 }.

Under the feedback law (16), the transverse dynamics satisfy (17)–(18). In terms of the state vector η, they can be written as ˙η = A⊥η, with 

A⊥ =



0 I 0

−Kp −Kd 00 0 −ks

 .

Since ks > 0 and the second-order system ¨y + Kd ˙y +

Kpy = 0 is exponentially stable, the matrix A⊥ is Hurwitz. Therefore, the manifold Zint is locally exponentially attrac-tive under the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics. Let Σ := Zint ∩ S denote a transversal Poincaré section. The associated Poincaré return map P : Σ → Σ assigns, whenever it is well defined, to each point in Σ the state obtained after one complete step of the hybrid system. A fixed point x∗ ∈ Σ satisfying P (x∗) = x∗ corresponds to a periodic walking gait. The stability of a walking gait is determined by the linearization of the Poincaré map at x∗, denoted by AP := 

DP (x∗). If all eigenvalues of AP lie strictly inside the unit disk, then the fixed point x∗ is locally exponentially stable, and the associated periodic orbit is locally exponentially orbitally stable. 

Theorem 1: Assume that the manifold Zint is invariant under the continuous-time dynamics and satisfies ∆( Zint ∩

S) ⊂ Z int . Assume moreover that the reduced Poincaré map on Σ = Zint ∩ S is well defined and admits a fixed point 

x∗ ∈ Σ. Then the full hybrid locomotion system admits a periodic walking gait passing through x∗.

Proof: Since Zint is invariant under the continuous-time dynamics and is preserved by the reset map, the hybrid dynamics restricted to Zint is well defined. Hence the reduced Poincaré map on Σ = Zint ∩ S is well posed whenever the corresponding return trajectory exists. If x∗ ∈ Σ is a fixed point of the reduced Poincaré map, then the reduced hybrid trajectory starting from x∗ returns to 

x∗ after one step. So, it defines a periodic orbit of the reduced hybrid dynamics on Zint . Since Zint is an invariant hybrid manifold of the full system, this orbit is also a periodic orbit of the full hybrid system. Hence the full system admits a periodic walking gait passing through x∗.The following result is a direct consequence of standard Poincaré-map arguments for hybrid systems and restricted hybrid zero dynamics; see, e.g., [23], [6]. 

Theorem 2: Consider the closed-loop hybrid locomotion system with feedback law (16). Suppose that 1) the manifold Zint is invariant under the continuous-time dynamics and satisfies ∆( Zint ∩ S) ⊂ Z int ,2) the restricted Poincaré map P : Σ → Σ, with Σ = 

Zint ∩ S, is well defined and admits a fixed point x∗,3) all eigenvalues of the Jacobian AP := DP (x∗) lie strictly inside the unit disk. Then the periodic walking gait associated with x∗ is locally exponentially orbitally stable. 

Proof: By the invariance of Zint under the continuous-time dynamics and the reset condition ∆( Zint ∩ S) ⊂ Z int ,the hybrid dynamics restricted to Zint are well defined. Thus the restricted Poincaré map on Σ = Zint ∩ S is well posed whenever the corresponding return trajectory exists. By Assumption 2, x∗ is a fixed point of the restricted Poincaré map. By Assumption 3, all eigenvalues of AP =

DP (x∗) lie strictly inside the unit disk. Therefore, x∗ is a locally exponentially stable fixed point of the restricted return map. Since Σ ⊂ Z int and the transverse closed-loop dynamics converge exponentially to Zint , standard results on restricted Poincaré maps and hybrid zero dynamics imply that the corresponding periodic orbit of the full hybrid locomotion system is locally exponentially orbitally stable; see, e.g., [23], [6]. IV. N UMERICAL RESULTS 

For the numerical study, we consider a structured planar 7-DOF hybrid biped model inspired by the slip-walking frame-work of Chen, Trkov, and Yi [20], [21]. The model is chosen so as to remain consistent with the control architecture developed in Sections II–III: one coordinate describes the longitudinal progression of the gait, while the remaining six coordinates are regulated through virtual holonomic outputs parameterized by Bézier polynomials. In the numerical implementation, the scalar virtual non-holonomic constraint is specified by ηs(q, ˙q) = A(q) ˙ q −b(q),with A(q) ≡ 1 0 0.10 0.08 0.04 −0.05 −0.03 ,while the prescribed slip law is taken as 

b(q) ≡ bk = vnom + sk

during the k-th stance phase, where sk denotes the imposed step-dependent slip level. Thus, in the simulations, A(q) is chosen constant and b(q) is implemented as a piecewise-constant reference from step to step. Although the simulation model is a structured surrogate rather than a full rigid-body Euler–Lagrange realization, it preserves the dimensional and geometric structure required by the proposed control law: six holonomic outputs, one scalar slip output, and a square stacked decoupling matrix. To assess consistency with the theoretical assumptions, we numerically evaluate along the simulated trajectories the regularity conditions used in the control design. In particular, we monitor the scalar slip decoupling term Ms(q) and the smallest singular value of the stacked matrix A(q, ˙q) = Ms(q)

Mh(q, ˙q)



. Table I summarizes the main indicators. The quantities min σmin (A) and min ∥Ms∥ act as structural regularity measures for the simulated model rather than direct performance metrics. In the present realization, they depend only weakly on the closed-loop evolution, which explains why their values are identical in the open-loop and controlled cases. By contrast, the number of successful steps, the terminal pre-impact speed, and the mean slip-output magnitude clearly distinguish the two responses. In particular, under the proposed feedback law the slip output remains close to zero throughout the simulation, while both 

Ms(q) and A(q, ˙q) remain uniformly away from singularity. These observations support, at least numerically for the simulated gait, the assumptions underlying Propositions 1–2 and the stability analysis of Section III-C.                 

> Quantity Open loop Controlled Successful steps 29 50 Terminal pre-impact speed v∗0.2565 0.5964 Mean |ηs|0.6505 0.0041
> min σmin (A)0.4417 0.4417
> min ∥Ms∥1.0106 1.0106

TABLE I: Numerical verification of regularity and perfor-mance indicators along the simulated gait. To make the numerical procedure explicit, the simulation loop underlying the experiments is summarized as follows. 

Algorithm 1 Hybrid simulation with virtual holonomic and nonholonomic constraints  

> 1:

Choose a step horizon N ∈ N and a step-dependent slip sequence {sk}Nk=1 . 

> 2:

Initialize the state x0 = ( q0, ˙q0) near the nominal gait.  

> 3:

for k = 1 , . . . , N do  

> 4:

Define the stepwise slip reference bk from the pre-scribed slip level sk. 

> 5:

Construct the virtual holonomic outputs y(q) =

h(q) − hd(θ(q)) , where hd is parameterized by Bézier polynomials.  

> 6:

Define the slip output ηs(q, ˙q) = A(q) ˙ q − bk. 

> 7:

Compute the continuous-time feedback law enforc-ing both the holonomic and nonholonomic constraints.  

> 8:

Integrate the closed-loop continuous-time dynamics until the impact event hsw (q) = 0 , ˙hsw (q, ˙q) < 0. 

> 9:

Apply the reset map and the leg-swap operation to obtain the next initial condition.  

> 10:

Record the pre-impact velocity, the slip-output his-tory, and the regularity indicators associated with Ms(q)

and the stacked decoupling matrix A(q, ˙q). 

> 11:

end for 

Algorithm 1 describes the general computational structure used in the numerical study. The main experiment uses a 50-step slip sequence with piecewise-constant levels sk ∈{0, 0.015 , 0.03 , 0, 0.02 }, applied over consecutive step intervals to emulate alternating ground patches of different tangential slip amounts. In the open-loop case, the virtual holonomic outputs are still tracked by the nominal continuous gait controller, but the scalar slip-regulation channel is not activated. In this case, the gait eventually loses stability after 29 successful steps, whereas under the proposed feedback law the walker completes 50 steps without failure. Figure 1 shows that, un-der variable slip conditions, the open-loop gait progressively loses forward speed and ultimately fails, while the controlled gait reorganizes after each change in the prescribed slip level and remains persistent over the full simulation horizon. At the same time, the controlled case maintains a very small slip-output error, in agreement with the imposed constraint manifold. Figure 2 shows the hip trajectory in the sagittal plane for the open-loop and controlled cases. The controlled gait preserves a coherent geometric walking pattern throughout the simulation, in agreement with the step-to-step stabi-lization shown in Fig. 1. Overall, the numerical results indicate that the proposed slip-compatible control design can simultaneously regulate the slip output and preserve robust periodic walking under nonuniform contact conditions. 

Fig. 1: Step-to-step response under variable slip conditions. Top: prescribed slip level at each step. Middle: pre-impact forward velocity for the open-loop and controlled cases. Bottom: slip-output magnitude under the controlled case. A video illustrating the controlled walking motion under the same variable-slip scenario is provided in https:// youtu.be/EWsuVqacxpU The video shows the persis-tence of the gait over the full 50-step horizon, the adaptation of the walker to the piecewise-constant slip sequence, and the maintenance of a coherent sagittal-plane motion while the slip output remains small throughout the simulation. This evidence complements Figs. 1–2 and further supports the effectiveness of the proposed slip-compatible control design. V. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

We developed a control framework for bipedal walking with foot slip based on virtual nonholonomic constraints. The proposed design regulates tangential stance-foot motion 

Fig. 2: Hip trajectory in the sagittal plane for the open-loop and controlled cases under variable slip conditions. while remaining compatible with the virtual holonomic con-straints used for gait generation, yielding a slip-compatible hybrid zero dynamics manifold and an orbital stability char-acterization via the reduced Poincaré map. Numerical simu-lations showed stable walking under variable slip conditions together with effective regulation of the slip output. Future work includes extending the framework to full Lagrangian models with explicit contact and friction effects, and studying more general or terrain-adaptive slip laws. Experimental validation and extension to three-dimensional locomotion are also natural directions for further research. 

Acknowledgment: We would like to thank Jessy Grizzle for introducing us to the problem of walking with foot slip and for his inspiring contributions to robotic locomotion. REFERENCES [1] O. Dosunmu-Ogunbi, A. Shrivastava, and J. W. Grizzle, “Demon-strating a robust walking algorithm for underactuated bipedal robots in non-flat, non-stationary environments,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 11 210–11 217. [2] J. Verhagen, X. Xiong, A. D. Ames, and A. Seth, “From human walking to bipedal robot locomotion: Reflex inspired compensation on planned and unplanned downsteps,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 01–08. [3] J. Siekmann, K. Green, J. Warila, A. Fern, and J. Hurst, “Blind bipedal stair traversal via sim-to-real reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.08328 , 2021. [4] K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, S. Kajita, M. Morisawa, K. Fujiwara, K. Harada, and H. Hirukawa, “Slip observer for walking on a low friction floor,” in 2005 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-gent Robots and Systems . IEEE, 2005, pp. 634–640. [5] K. Chen, M. Trkov, S. Chen, J. Yi, and T. Liu, “Balance recovery control of human walking with foot slip,” in 2016 American Control Conference (ACC) . IEEE, 2016, pp. 4385–4390. [6] E. R. Westervelt, J. W. Grizzle, C. Chevallereau, J. H. Choi, and B. Morris, Feedback Control of Dynamic Bipedal Robot Locomotion .CRC Press, 2007. [7] A. D. Ames, “First steps toward automatically generating bipedal robotic walking from human data,” in Robot Motion and Control 2011 .Springer, 2012, pp. 89–116. [8] J. W. Grizzle and C. Chevallereau, Virtual Constraints and Hybrid Zero Dynamics for Realizing Underactuated Bipedal Locomotion .Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2018, pp. 1–31. [9] A. M. Bloch, “Nonholonomic mechanics and control,” Interdisci-plinary Applied Mathematics , vol. 24, 2003. [10] E. Stratoglou, A. A. Simoes, A. Bloch, and L. Colombo, “Virtual affine nonholonomic constraints,” in International Conference on Geometric Science of Information . Springer, 2023, pp. 89–96. [11] B. Griffin and J. Grizzle, “Nonholonomic virtual constraints for dynamic walking,” in 2015 54th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) . IEEE, 2015, pp. 4053–4060. [12] ——, “Nonholonomic virtual constraints and gait optimization for ro-bust walking control,” The International Journal of Robotics Research ,vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 895–922, 2017. [13] A. A. Simoes, E. Stratoglou, A. Bloch, and L. J. Colombo, “Virtual nonholonomic constraints: A geometric approach,” Automatica , vol. 155, p. 111166, 2023. [14] E. Stratoglou, A. A. Simoes, A. Bloch, and L. J. Colombo, “On the geometry of virtual nonlinear nonholonomic constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 3362–3369, 2024. [15] A. A. Simoes, A. Bloch, L. Colombo, and E. Stratoglou, “Geometric stabilization of virtual nonlinear nonholonomic constraints,” in Inter-national Conference on Geometric Science of Information . Springer, 2025, pp. 11–19. [16] J. C. Horn, A. Mohammadi, K. A. Hamed, and R. D. Gregg, “Hybrid zero dynamics of bipedal robots under nonholonomic virtual constraints,” IEEE Control Systems Letters , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 386–391, 2018. [17] K. A. Hamed and A. D. Ames, “Nonholonomic hybrid zero dynamics for the stabilization of periodic orbits: Application to underactuated robotic walking,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology ,vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 2689–2696, 2019. [18] J. C. Horn, A. Mohammadi, K. A. Hamed, and R. D. Gregg, “Non-holonomic virtual constraint design for variable-incline bipedal robotic walking,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3691–3698, 2020. [19] J. C. Horn and R. D. Gregg, “Nonholonomic virtual constraints for control of powered prostheses across walking speeds,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , 2021. [20] K. Chen, M. Trkov, and J. Yi, “Hybrid zero dynamics of human biped walking with foot slip,” in 2017 American Control Conference (ACC) .IEEE, 2017, pp. 2124–2129. [21] M. Trkov, K. Chen, and J. Yi, “Bipedal model and hybrid zero dynam-ics of human walking with foot slip,” ASME Journal of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics , 2019. [22] E. R. Westervelt, J. W. Grizzle, and D. E. Koditschek, “Hybrid zero dynamics of planar biped walkers,” IEEE transactions on automatic control , vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 42–56, 2003. [23] B. Morris and J. W. Grizzle, “A restricted poincaré map for deter-mining exponentially stable periodic orbits in systems with impulse effects: Application to bipedal robots,” in Proceedings of the 44th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control . IEEE, 2005, pp. 4199– 4206. [24] J. R. Goodman and L. J. Colombo, “On the existence and uniqueness of poincaré maps for systems with impulse effects,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1815–1821, 2019.